<html><body><div dir="ltr" id="description">
<h3 class="heading-2" style="margin-top:1.5em;">
<a name="Table_of_contents."></a>Table of contents.</h3>
<ul class="nav nav-tabs nav-stacked" id="tableofcontent">
<li>
<a href="#143A">143A: Order of Negative Morpheme and Verb</a>
</li>
<li>
<a href="#143B">143B: Obligatory Double Negation</a>
</li>
<li>
<a href="#143C">143C: Optional Double Negation</a>
</li>
<li>
<a href="#143D">143D: Optional Triple Negation</a>
</li>
<li><a href="#143E">143E: Preverbal Negative Morphemes</a></li>
<li><a href="#143F">143F: Postverbal Negative Morphemes</a></li>
<li><a href="#143G">143G: Minor morphological means of signaling negation</a></li>
</ul>
<p class="Textbody">This chapter examines the order of negative morpheme and lexical verb for negative morphemes that code simple clausal negation, like <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_eng" title="view language details">English</a> <i>not</i>  in (1).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(1)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">
<p class="Standard">The mouse did <b>not</b> eat the cheese.</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">Not considered are negative constructions involving more than simple clausal negation, like (2a), or clauses with nonverbal predicates, like (2b) to (2d), in languages where one or more of these is treated differently from clauses with verbal predicates, negative imperative (prohibitive) sentences, like (2e), or constituent negation, where a non-verbal constituent is the focus of the negation, as in (2f).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(2)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a. </p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">The mouse <b>never</b> eats cheese.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b. </p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">John is <b>not</b> honest.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">c. </p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">John is <b>not </b>a doctor.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">d. </p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">John is <b>not</b> at his house.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">e. </p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><b>Don't </b>take those bananas.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">f. </p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">It is <b>not</b> John who took the bananas.</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">See Chapter <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/chapter/112">112</a> for discussion of different types of negative morphemes and Chapters <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/chapter/113">113</a> and <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/chapter/114">114</a> for other typological features of clausal negation. This chapter distinguishes negative affixes from negative words, but among negative words does not distinguish negative auxiliary verbs from negative particles (see Chapter <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/chapter/112">112</a>). Maps that make such a distinction can be obtained by combining Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/112A">112A</a> with maps in this chapter, though I have such data for only a subset of the languages in this chapter. Chapter <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/chapter/144">144</a> further discusses the position of negative words relative to the subject and object as well as to the verb. Chapter <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/chapter/71">71</a> examines prohibitive sentences.</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143A">143A</a> shows all the languages in the sample, while Maps <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143B">143B</a>, <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143C">143C</a>, and <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143D">143D</a> show only the languages with double and triple negation. Maps <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143E">143E</a>,  <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143F">143F</a>, and <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143G">143G</a> rearrange the data on the first four maps and show languages with preverbal negative morphemes, postverbal negative morphemes, and negative tone respectively. </p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">No distinction is made here between morphemes that only code negation, like <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_eng" title="view language details">English</a> <i>not</i>, and morphemes that code grammatical features in addition to negation. For example, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_mad" title="view language details">Ma'di</a> (Central Sudanic, <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nilosaharan" title="Nilo-Saharan">Nilo-Saharan</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/SD" title="view languages for country">Sudan</a> and <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/UG" title="view languages for country">Uganda</a>) has two negative words <i>kʊ̄</i>  and <i>kʊ̄rʊ̀</i>, the former for nonpast negation, the latter for past negation, as in (3a) and (3b).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(3) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_mad" title="view language details">Ma'di</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Blackings-and-Fabb-2003" title="view reference details">Blackings and Fabb 2003</a>: 467)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>m´-āwí</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>dʒótī</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>kʊ̄</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
    </td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span>-open</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">door</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><b><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span>.nonpast</span></b></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
    </td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I am not opening the door.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>m´-āwí</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>dʒótī</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>kʊ̄̄rʊ̀</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
    </td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span>-open</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">door</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><b><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span>.past</span></b></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
    </td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I did not open the door.’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">More complex cases involve words that also code the person and number of the subject, like the initial word <i>bàn</i>  in the <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_hau" title="view language details">Hausa</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/afroasiatic#westchadic" title="West Chadic">West Chadic</a>, <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/afroasiatic" title="Afro-Asiatic">Afro-Asiatic</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/NG" title="view languages for country">Nigeria</a> and <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/NE" title="view languages for country">Niger</a>) example in (4), which also codes a first person singular subject.</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(4) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_hau" title="view language details">Hausa</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Kraft-and-Kraft-1973" title="view reference details">Kraft and Kraft 1973</a>: 108)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>bàn</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>san</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>sūna-n-sà</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ba</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><b><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span>.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span></b></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">know</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">name-<span class="T3">link-3sg</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I don’t know his name.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">In this case <i>bàn</i>  counts as a negative word because it codes negation even though it also codes first person singular. In some cases, one can identify a negative morpheme within such words, as in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_eng" title="view language details">English</a>, where in a form like <i>didn’t</i>, the <i>n’t</i>  is a suffix on the auxiliary verb <i>did</i>. However, since (as discussed just below) we are examining the position of negative morphemes relative to the main verb (rather than auxiliaries), the entire word <i>didn’t</i>  counts as a negative word, like <i>bàn</i>  in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_hau" title="view language details">Hausa</a>, so this is not considered a construction involving a negative suffix but rather as one involving a negative word.</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">In examining the order of negative morpheme and verb, we examine its position relative to the main verb rather than the finite verb; in other words, in clauses where the finite verb is an auxiliary verb, we examine the position of the negative relative to the main verb, ignoring the auxiliary verb. In some languages, this can obscure the fact that the position of the negative morpheme is defined, according to the grammatical rules of the language, relative to the finite verb, which is generally the auxiliary verb if there is one. For example, in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_dsh" title="view language details">Danish</a>, the negative word immediately follows the finite verb. When there is no auxiliary verb, as in (5a), the negative will follow the main verb, but when there is an auxiliary verb, as in (5b), it will precede the main verb, since in such cases it is immediately following the finite auxiliary verb.</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(5) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_dsh" title="view language details">Danish</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Allan-et-al-1995" title="view reference details">Allan, Holmes and Lundskår-Nielsen 1995</a>: 492)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Jens</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>købte</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ikke</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>en</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>bil</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>i</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>går.</i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">John</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">bought</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><b><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></span></b></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">indef</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">car</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="preposition">prep</span></span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">yesterday</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="8" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘John did not buy a car yesterday.’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Han</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>har</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ikke</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>købt</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>en</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>bil</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>i</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>år.</i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
        </td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">He</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">has</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><b><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></span></b></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">bought</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">indef</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">car</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="preposition">prep</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">year</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="8" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘He hasn’t bought a car this year.’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">Because we ignore the auxiliary verb, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_dsh" title="view language details">Danish</a> is classified in this chapter as a language with NegV/VNeg order, as one with both orders of negative and verb, with neither dominant. The decision to use the order of negative and main verb, even if the main verb is not the finite verb in the clause, is motivated by a number of factors. One is that we want to use a consistent approach in describing word order in both this chapter and the next chapter, Chapter <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/chapter/144">144</a>, where we examine the position of the negative morpheme relative to the subject and object as well as the verb. In describing the order of subject, object, and verb, it is conventional to base this on the position of the subject and object with respect to the main verb, not the auxiliary verb if there is one. For example, SAuxOV clauses in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ger" title="view language details">German</a> are normally considered SOV, based on the position of the main verb, rather than SVO, based on the position of the auxiliary verb, despite the fact that the verb-second order in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ger" title="view language details">German</a> means that both SVO and SAuxOV clauses in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ger" title="view language details">German</a> are placing the object after the finite verb. In discussing the position of the negative in SOV languages, we want to use SOV in its conventional sense. Furthermore, if we were to classify languages according to the position of the negative relative to the auxiliary verb, we would have to either ignore the main verb altogether or describe the position of the negative relative to both the main verb and the auxiliary. Ignoring the main verb altogether would be as serious as ignoring the auxiliary verb and describing the position of the negative, subject, and object relative to both the main verb and the auxiliary verb would have complicated things in Chapter <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/chapter/144">144</a> immensely. Another reason for ignoring auxiliary verbs is that in most languages in which there is little verb morphology, it is generally unclear whether a word coding tense and/or aspect should be considered a verb or not and unclear what should be considered the finite verb. If we have no clear basis for deciding whether a word is an auxiliary verb in a given language or what is the finite verb, it is necessarily unclear how to classify such a language in terms of the position of the negative relative to the finite verb. A final reason is that when the negative itself is an auxiliary verb, we need to code its position relative to the nonfinite main verb; in these cases, we have to classify such languages in terms of the position of the main verb, even though the main verb is not the finite verb. If we want to be consistent, then we must code the negative relative to the main verb rather than the finite verb in all languages.</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">Before beginning the discussion, it is necessary to explain the notation used in characterizing the types on this map and subsequent maps. Negative affixes are indicated with square brackets and a hyphen: prefixes are denoted by [Neg-V] and negative suffixes by [V-Neg]. Negative words are indicated without square brackets or hyphen. For example, Neg[V-Neg] means a preverbal negative word plus a negative suffix. On later maps which include types with optional negative morphemes, parentheses are used to indicate an optional negative morpheme. For example, [(Neg-)V]Neg means an optional negative prefix and an obligatory postverbal negative word.</p>
<h2 class="heading-1"><a name="143A"></a><b>Map 143A: Order of Negative Morpheme and Verb</b></h2>
<div style="text-align:left">
<table class="table table-hover values" id="value-table-143A" style="width: auto;">__values_143A__</table>
</div>
<p class="Textbody">(The notation “Type X / Type Y” means that the language has two constructions of the types in Types 1 to 5, with neither clearly dominant.)</p>
<h3 class="heading-2">
<a name="A1._Defining_the_values"></a>A1. Defining the values</h3>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionA1.1."></a>Type 1: NegV</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 1, and by far the most frequent type, represents those languages in which the normal expression of clausal negation is a negative word which precedes the verb, as in the example from <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_kut" title="view language details">Kutenai</a> (isolate; western North America) in (6).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(6) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_kut" title="view language details">Kutenai</a> (own data)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ʔat=u</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>qa</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ʔiknuquk-ni.</i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">habit=1subj</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><b><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></span></b></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">smoke(tobacco)-<span class="T3">indic</span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I don't smoke.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">Note that in languages of this type, the negative word need not immediately precede the verb. In <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_yuw" title="view language details">Yuwaalaraay</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/australian#pamanyungan" title="Pama-Nyungan">Pama-Nyungan</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/AU" title="view languages for country">Australia</a>), the negative word normally occurs at the beginning of the sentence, separated from the verb, as in (7).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(7) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_yuw" title="view language details">Yuwaalaraay</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Williams-1980a" title="view reference details">Williams 1980a</a>: 107)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>wa:l</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ŋinda</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>wi:</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>garay.</i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><b><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></span></b></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">2sg</span>.subj</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">wood</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">cut.<span class="T3">nonfut</span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘You didn’t cut any firewood.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">Negative clitics, i.e. negative morphemes which attach phonologically to some word but vary as to what word they attach to, are treated here as negative words. For example, in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_sid" title="view language details">Sidaama</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/afroasiatic#easterncushitic" title="Eastern Cushitic">Eastern Cushitic</a>, <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/afroasiatic" title="Afro-Asiatic">Afro-Asiatic</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/ET" title="view languages for country">Ethiopia</a>), the negative clitic attaches either to the verb, as in (8a), or to another constituent preceding the verb which is the focus of negation, as in (8b).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(8) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_sid" title="view language details">Sidaama</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Kawachi-2007" title="view reference details">Kawachi 2007</a>: 289, 290)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Bule</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>sagalé</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>dangur-íra</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>di=</b>u-it-ino.</i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">Bule</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">food.<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="object">obj</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">Dangur-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="dative">dat</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><b><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></span>=</b>give-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">3sg</span>.fem-pres.perf:3</span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘Bule didn’t give food to Dangur.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Bule</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>sagalé</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>di=</b>dangur-íra</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>u-it-ino.</i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">Bule</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">food.<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="object">obj</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><b><span class="T3">neg=</span></b>Dangur-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="dative">dat</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">give-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">3sg</span>.fem-pres.perf:3</span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘Bule didn’t give food to <i>Dangur</i> (but to someone else).’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">Constituent negation of the sort illustrated in (8b) is excluded from consideration from this chapter and from Chapter <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/chapter/144">144</a>; however, the fact that the negative morpheme in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_sid" title="view language details">Sidaama</a> can attach to other constituents shows that <i>di</i>  is not a prefix in (8a) but rather a clitic.</p>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionA1.2."></a>Type 2: VNeg</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 2 represents those languages in which there is a negative word which follows the verb, again not necessarily immediately, as in (9) from <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_kre" title="view language details">Kresh</a> (Central Sudanic, <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nilosaharan" title="Nilo-Saharan">Nilo-Saharan</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/SD" title="view languages for country">Sudan</a>).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(9) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_kre" title="view language details">Kresh</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Brown-1994" title="view reference details">Brown 1994</a>: 165)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Kôkó</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ãmbá</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>gõkó</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>´dĩ.</b></i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">Koko</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">he.hit</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">Goko</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><b><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></span></b></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘Koko did not hit Goko.’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionA1.3."></a>Type 3: [Neg-V]</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 3 represents those languages in which the normal expression of negation is a negative prefix on the verb, as in (10) from <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_pga" title="view language details">Pilagá</a> (<a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/guaicuruan" title="Guaicuruan">Guaicuruan</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/AR" title="view languages for country">Argentina</a>).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(10) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_pga" title="view language details">Pilagá</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Vidal-2001" title="view reference details">Vidal 2001</a>: 284)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>sa-</b>n-čo’ot-a</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>haga’</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>yawo-’</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><b><span class="T3">neg-</span></b><span class="T3">3subj</span>-tell-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">sg</span>.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="object">obj</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">clsfr</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">woman-<span class="T3">pauc</span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘He did not tell about the women.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionA1.4."></a>Type 4: [V-Neg]</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 4 represents those languages in which the normal expression of negation is a negative suffix on the verb, as in (11) from <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_rao" title="view language details">Rao</a> (<a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/lowersepikramu" title="Lower Sepik-Ramu">Lower Sepik-Ramu</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/PG" title="view languages for country">Papua New Guinea</a>).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(11) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_rao" title="view language details">Rao</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Stanhope-1980" title="view reference details">Stanhope 1980</a>: 10)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>gu</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>mə<b>-ndə</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">eat<b>-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></span></b></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I am not eating.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionA1.5."></a>Type 5: Negative Tone</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 5 represents languages in which the normal expression of negation is by means of distinctive tone on the verb. While we will see that there are a number of languages that use tone to signal negation, most combine this with some segmental coding or use it as an alternative to segmental coding. The sample used here contains only one language in which tone is the sole coding of negation, namely <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_egn" title="view language details">Engenni</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/nigercongo#edoid" title="Edoid">Edoid</a>, <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nigercongo" title="Niger-Congo">Niger-Congo</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/NG" title="view languages for country">Nigeria</a>), in which a high tone on the verb signals negation (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Thomas-1978" title="view reference details">Thomas 1978</a>: 68). (There is no <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_egn" title="view language details">Engenni</a> example in my source that is clear enough to illustrate this.) It is worth mentioning here the case of <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_man" title="view language details">Mano</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/nigercongo#easternmande" title="Eastern Mande">Eastern Mande</a>, <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nigercongo" title="Niger-Congo">Niger-Congo</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/GN" title="view languages for country">Guinea</a> and <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/LR" title="view languages for country">Liberia</a>), in which negation is coded either by a preverbal negative particle or by changing the tone on the subject pronoun. Compare affirmative (12a), with mid tone on the first person singular subject pronoun, with negative (12b), with falling tone on the subject pronoun.</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(12) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_man" title="view language details">Mano</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Becker-Donner-1965" title="view reference details">Becker-Donner 1965</a>: 44)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>n̄</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>yídò.</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">know</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I know.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>n̂</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>yídò.</i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><b><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span>.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></span></b></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">know</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I don’t know.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">Because the negative coding is on a preverbal word, the coding in (12b) counts as a preverbal negative word in the sense that there is a preverbal word that codes the person and number of the subject and negation, analogous to the case of <i>bàn</i>  in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_hau" title="view language details">Hausa</a> in (4) above.</p>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionA1.n"></a>Types 6 - 12: Mixed types</h4>
<p class="Textbody">The next seven types represent mixed types, languages that have two orders or constructions from Types 1 to 5. In some languages where there are two such constructions, the same morpheme is involved, as in (13) from <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_eip" title="view language details">Eipo</a> (<a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/transnewguinea" title="Trans-New Guinea">Trans-New Guinea</a>; Papua, <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/ID" title="view languages for country">Indonesia</a>), where the same word <i>gum</i>  either precedes the verb, as in (13a), or follows the verb, as in (13b).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(13) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_eip" title="view language details">Eipo</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Heeschen-1998" title="view reference details">Heeschen 1998</a>: 222, 223)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>...</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>gum</b></i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>dib-nu-n</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><b><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></span></b></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">eat-<span class="T3">fut-1sg</span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘... I will not eat.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Na</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ton</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>maral-ya-ne-lam</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>gum</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">and</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">wound-come-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg-2sg</span>.pres</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><b><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></span></b></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘It is not that you come to wound me.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">More commonly, however, a different morpheme is involved, as in (14) from <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_agh" title="view language details">Aghem</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/nigercongo#bantoid" title="Bantoid">Bantu</a>, <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nigercongo" title="Niger-Congo">Niger-Congo</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/CM" title="view languages for country">Cameroon</a>), where negation is signaled in completive aspect by a word <i>kà</i>  that precedes the verb as in (14a), while in incompletive aspect, it is signaled by a word <i>'yɔ̀</i>  that follows the verb, as in (14b).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(14) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_agh" title="view language details">Aghem</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Anderson-1979" title="view reference details">Anderson 1979</a>: 118, 123)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ò</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>kà</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>bó</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ghâmfɔ̀</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">3sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><b><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span>.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="completive">compl</span></span></b></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">hit.<span class="T3">past</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">mat</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘He did not hit the mat (earlier today).’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ò</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>bòó</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>'yɔ̀</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ghâmfɔ̀</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">3sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">hit.<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="incompletive">incompl</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><b><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span>.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="incompletive">incompl</span></span></b></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">mat</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘He is not hitting the mat.’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">In some languages where there are two options, the choice is semantically or grammatically governed, as is the case with <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_agh" title="view language details">Aghem</a>. In other cases, the choice is not grammatically governed, but determined by extragrammatical factors, without a clear semantic contrast associated with the two options. This is apparently the case with <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_eip" title="view language details">Eipo</a> in (13). To a large extent, one can predict whether or not the choice is semantically or grammatically governed from whether the same morpheme is involved: if different morphemes are involved, as in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_agh" title="view language details">Aghem</a>, the choice is generally semantically or grammatically conditioned, while if the same morpheme is involved, as in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_eip" title="view language details">Eipo</a>, the choice is generally conditioned by extragrammatical factors. However, there are exceptions to this generalization, cases where different morphemes are involved but the choice is still apparently not governed semantically or grammatically, as in (15) from <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_lav" title="view language details">Lavukaleve</a> (<a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/solomonseastpapuan" title="Solomons East Papuan">Solomons East Papuan</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/SB" title="view languages for country">Solomon Islands</a>), where <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Terrill-2003" title="view reference details">Terrill (2003</a>: 465) describes the choice between the postverbal negative word <i>tamu</i>  in (15a) and the suffix <i>-la</i>  in (15b) as “stylistically” governed.</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(15) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_lav" title="view language details">Lavukaleve</a>  (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Terrill-2003" title="view reference details">Terrill 2003</a>: 465)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="12">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="56">
<p class="Standard"><i>Ui</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>eu-u</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="164">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>tamu</b></i>.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="12"> 
		</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">food</p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">3sg</span>.neut.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="object">obj</span></span>-eat</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><b><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></span></b></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">'We didn't eat.'</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="48"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>...</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="55">
<p class="Standard"><i>ui</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>e-u<b>-la</b>-m</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>...</i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">food</p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">3sg</span>.neut.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="object">obj</span></span>-eat<b>-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></span></b><span class="T3">-masc.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">'... he didn't eat ...'</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionA1.6."></a>Type 6: NegV / VNeg</h4>
<p class="Textbody">The first of the types involving a mixture of Types 1 to 5 is Type 6, which represents languages where negation is expressed by a negative word that either precedes or follows the verb. Both <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_eip" title="view language details">Eipo</a> and <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_agh" title="view language details">Aghem</a>, illustrated above in (13) and (14) respectively, are instances of Type 6.</p>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionA1.7."></a>Type 7: NegV / [Neg-V]</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 7 represents languages in which one finds either a negative word preceding the verb or a negative prefix, as illustrated by <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_maa" title="view language details">Maasai</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/nilosaharan#nilotic" title="Nilotic">Nilotic</a>, <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nilosaharan" title="Nilo-Saharan">Nilo-Saharan</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/KE" title="view languages for country">Kenya</a> and <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/TZ" title="view languages for country">Tanzania</a>), where negation is expressed by a prefix <i>m-</i>  in the present and continuous tenses, as in (16a), and by a separate preverbal word <i>e<span style="font-family:'Times New Roman'; font-size:92%;">I</span>t<span style="font-size:92%;">Ú</span></i>  in the past tense, as in (16b).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(16) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_maa" title="view language details">Maasai</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Tucker-and-Mpaayei-1955" title="view reference details">Tucker and Mpaayei 1955</a>: 67)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><b><i>e<span style="font-family:'Times New Roman'; font-size:92%;">I</span>t<span style="font-size:92%;">Ú</span></i></b></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>a-rany.</i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><b><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></span></b></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span>-sing</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I did not sing.’ (Tucker and Mpaayei 1955: 67)</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>m</b>-a-rany</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b>neg-</b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span>-sing</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I do not sing.’ (Tucker and Mpaayei 1955: 67)</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionA1.8."></a>Type 8: NegV / [V-Neg]</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 8 represents languages in which the negative morpheme is either a separate word that precedes the verb or a suffix, as in (17) from <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ram" title="view language details">Rama</a> (<a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/chibchan" title="Chibchan">Chibchan</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/NI" title="view languages for country">Nicaragua</a>).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(17) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ram" title="view language details">Rama</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Grinevald-1988" title="view reference details">Grinevald 1988</a>: 183, 185)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>nkiikna-lut</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>uut</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>aa</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>kain-i</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">man-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="plural">pl</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">dory</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><b><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></span></b></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">make-<span class="T3">tns</span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘The men don’t make a dory.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>i-sik-<b>taama</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">3-arrive-<b><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></span></b></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘He did not arrive.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionA1.9."></a>Type 9: VNeg / [Neg-V]</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 9 represents languages in which the negative morpheme is either a separate word following the verb or a prefix, illustrated for <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ngo" title="view language details">Ngoni</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/nigercongo#bantoid" title="Bantoid">Bantu</a>, <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nigercongo" title="Niger-Congo">Niger-Congo</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/MZ" title="view languages for country">Mozambique</a> and <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/TZ" title="view languages for country">Tanzania</a>) in (18).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(18) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ngo" title="view language details">Ngoni</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Ngonyani-2003" title="view reference details">Ngonyani 2003</a>: 86)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Ni-gega</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>lepa</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>manji</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span>-carry</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">water</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I am not carrying water.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Ne</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>na-</b>ku-gega</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>chidengu</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b>neg-</b>pres</span>-carry</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">basket</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I am not going to carry the basket.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionA1.10."></a>Type 10: VNeg / [V-Neg]</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 10 represents languages in which the negative morpheme is either a separate word following the verb or a suffix, illustrated above in (15) by <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_lav" title="view language details">Lavukaleve</a>.</p>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionA1.11."></a>Type 11: [Neg-V] / [V-Neg]</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 11 represents languages in which the negative morpheme is either a prefix or a suffix, illustrated by <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_lad" title="view language details">Ladakhi</a> (Tibeto-Burman; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/IN" title="view languages for country">India</a>) in (19).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(19) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_lad" title="view language details">Ladakhi</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Koshal-1979" title="view reference details">Koshal 1979</a>: 243, 245)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>rgyəlpo-gun-ni</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>khər</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>rtsigge<b>-mə-</b>nok</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">king-<span class="T3">plur-erg</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">palace</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">build<b><span class="T3">-neg-</span></b><span class="T3">historical.pres</span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘Kings do not build palaces.’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ŋə</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>bənərəs-lə</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>mə-</b>soŋ-pin</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span>.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="absolutive">abs</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">Banares-to</p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><b><span class="T3">neg-</span></b>go-<span class="T3">past</span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I did not go to Benares’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionA1.12."></a>Type 12: [Neg-V] / Negative Infix</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 12 represents languages in which the negative morpheme is either a prefix or an infix. The sole instance of a language of this type in the sample is <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_nwd" title="view language details">Dolakha Newar</a> (Tibeto-Burman; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/NP" title="view languages for country">Nepal</a>), illustrated in (20). In this language, the negative morpheme is an affix which immediately precedes the last syllable of the verb stem. If the verb stem is monosyllabic, it will appear as a prefix, as in (20a). If it is disyllabic, it will appear as in infix, as in (20b).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(20) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_nwd" title="view language details">Dolakha Newar</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Genetti-2007" title="view reference details">Genetti 2007</a>: 177, 176)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>thanu</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>kesi</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>bā=n=uŋ</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>māyā</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ma-</b>yet</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">today</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">tomorrow</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">father=<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="ergative">erg</span></span>=also</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">love</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><b><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></span></b>-do</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘These days father also doesn’t love me.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>li<b>&lt;mā&gt;</b>ŋa</i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">walk<b>&lt;<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></span>&gt;</b></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘not walk’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">An alternative way of characterizing <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_nwd" title="view language details">Dolakha Newar</a> would be to say that the negative affix is always an infix in the sense that there is actually only one construction that defines the position of the affix relative to a particular syllable in the word, making it an infix, and in some instances the position of that infix happens to precede all material in the root to which it is infixed.</p>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionA1.13."></a>Type 13: Optional Single Negation</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 13 represents languages in which it is possible to have negative clauses without a negative morpheme. In <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_wya" title="view language details">Wyandot</a> (<a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/iroquoian" title="Iroquoian">Iroquoian</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/CA" title="view languages for country">Canada</a>), negated clauses involve an optional preverbal negative word <i><b>tąʔą ~ hąʔą ~ ąʔą</b></i>, illustrated in (21a), (21c) and (21g) plus one of two verbal prefixes, one which <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Kopris-2001" title="view reference details">Kopris (2001)</a> characterizes as a negative morpheme, <i>t(e(ʔ))-</i>, illustrated in (21a) and (21b) the other which he calls contrastive, <i>t(i)-</i>  illustrated in (21c) and (21d), which must be used instead of the negative prefix when the verb is in factual mood. However, the so-called negative prefix, <i>t(e(ʔ))-</i>, is also used in counterfactual conditionals, as in (21e), so that I treat it as some sort of ‘irrealis’ prefix. The contrastive prefix <i>t-</i>  is also used in contexts where <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_eng" title="view language details">English</a> would use the word <i>but</i>, as in (21f). It is also possible to use the negative particle itself, without either the negative or the contrastive prefix, as in (21g).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(21) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_wya" title="view language details">Wyandot</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Kopris-2001" title="view reference details">Kopris 2001</a>: 482, 213, 214, 492, 212, 215, 249)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="2%">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="5%">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>tąʔą</b></i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="8" style="text-align:left;" width="40%">
<p class="Standard"><i>te-hù-t-rihúʔt-ę.</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="6" style="text-align:left;" width="53%"> 
		</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="2%"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="5%">
<p class="Standard"><b><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></span></b></p>
</td>
<td colspan="8" style="text-align:left;" width="40%">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">irr-masc.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">sg</span>.pat-semirefl</span>-listen-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="stative">stat</span></span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="6" style="text-align:left;" width="53%"> 
		</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left; padding-bottom:.4em;" width="2%"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="15" style="text-align:left; padding-bottom:.4em;" width="98%">
<p class="Standard">'He did not mind.'</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="2%">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;" width="15%">
<p class="Standard"><i>te-wati-ʔtǫhts-ahs</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="5%">
<p class="Standard"><i>dĕ</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;" width="25%">
<p class="Standard"><i>yu-hšatę-ʔ</i>.</p>
</td>
<td colspan="6" style="text-align:left;" width="53%"> 
		</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="2%"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;" width="15%">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">irr-nonmasc.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="plural">pl</span>.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="agent">agt</span></span>-hatch-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="habitual">hab</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="5%">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="article">art</span></span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;" width="25%">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">fem.indef.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">sg</span>.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="patient">pat</span></span>-ride-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="stative">stat</span></span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="6" style="text-align:left;" width="53%"> 
		</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left; padding-bottom:.4em;" width="2%"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="15" style="text-align:left; padding-bottom:.4em;" width="98%">
<p class="Standard">'Horses don't hatch.'</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="2%">
<p class="Standard">c.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="5%">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>hąʔą</b></i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;" width="20%">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>t-</b>a-hęd-urę-haʔ</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;" width="10%">
<p class="Standard"><i>...</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="8" style="text-align:left;" width="66%"> 
		</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="2%"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="5%">
<p class="Standard"><b><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></span></b></p>
</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;" width="20%">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b>contr-</b>fact-masc.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="plural">pl</span>.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="agent">agt</span></span>-find-<span class="T3">punc</span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;" width="10%"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="8" style="text-align:left;" width="66%"> 
		</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left; padding-bottom:.4em;" width="2%"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="15" style="text-align:left; padding-bottom:.4em;" width="98%">
<p class="Standard">'They could not find out [what was the matter].'</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="2%">
<p class="Standard">d.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="5%">
<p class="Standard"><i>...</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="5%">
<p class="Standard"><i>dzižúh</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;" width="20%">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>t-</b>a:-w-áʔtǫ-ʔ</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="7" style="text-align:left;" width="35%">
<p class="Standard"><i>d-usa-wátì:-dya-há:</i>.</p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;" width="33%"> 
		</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="2%"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="5%"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="5%">
<p class="Standard">because</p>
</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;" width="20%">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b>contr-</b>fact-fem.zoic.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">sg</span>.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="agent">agt</span></span>-possible-<span class="T3">punc</span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="7" style="text-align:left;" width="35%">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">part-repet.fact-nonmasc.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="plural">pl</span>.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="agent">agt</span></span>-eat-<span class="T3">punc</span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;" width="33%"> 
		</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left; padding-bottom:.4em;" width="2%"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="15" style="text-align:left; padding-bottom:.4em;" width="98%">
<p class="Standard">'[The eagle mother began to worry] because they [her children] could no longer eat.'</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="2%">
<p class="Standard">e.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="5%">
<p class="Standard"><i>...</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;" width="10%">
<p class="Standard"><i>teʔ-wayéʔ-dyai-h</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="8" style="text-align:left;" width="40%">
<p class="Standard"><i>t-ay-atáky-anǫnyǫ-hǫh</i>.</p>
</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;" width="23%"> 
		</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="2%"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="5%"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;" width="10%">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">irr-1sg.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="patient">pat</span></span>-marry-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="stative">stat</span></span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="8" style="text-align:left;" width="40%">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">irr-1sg.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="patient">pat</span></span>-talk-<span class="T3">distr-stat</span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;" width="23%"> 
		</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left; padding-bottom:.4em;" width="2%"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="15" style="text-align:left; padding-bottom:.4em;" width="98%">
<p class="Standard">'[I wish that] if I were married, I would converse like this forever.'</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="2%">
<p class="Standard">f.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="5%">
<p class="Standard"><i>...</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;" width="20%">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ti-</b>s-ù:-wǫ́-ht</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;" width="20%">
<p class="Standard"><i>deʔ-dyaʔwiš</i>.</p>
</td>
<td colspan="6" style="text-align:left;" width="53%"> 
		</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="2%"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="5%"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;" width="20%">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b>contr</b>-repet-masc.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">sg</span>.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="patient">pat</span></span>-arrive-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="causative">caus</span>.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="stative">stat</span></span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;" width="20%">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="article">art</span></span>-turtle</p>
</td>
<td colspan="6" style="text-align:left;" width="53%"> 
		</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left; padding-bottom:.4em;" width="2%"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="15" style="text-align:left; padding-bottom:.4em;" width="98%">
<p class="Standard">'[Raccoon then competed with Turtle,] but Turtle arrived there first.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="2%">
<p class="Standard">g.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="5%">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ą́ʔ</b></i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;" width="25%">
<p class="Standard"><i>t-u:sa-ya-íʔtrǫ̀-d-a</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="5%">
<p class="Standard"><i>díkaʔ</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="5%">
<p class="Standard"><i>tedíh</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;" width="20%">
<p class="Standard"><i>d-i:-wì:nǫ́-h</i>.</p>
</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;" width="38%"> 
		</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="2%"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="5%">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;" width="25%">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">du-opt.repet-fem.zoic.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">sg</span>.agent</span>-give-<span class="T3">disloc-punc</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="5%">
<p class="Standard">these</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="5%">
<p class="Standard">two</p>
</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;" width="20%">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">part-nonmasc.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="dual">du</span>.agent</span>-pretty-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="stative">stat</span></span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;" width="38%"> 
		</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left; padding-bottom:.4em;" width="2%"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="15" style="text-align:left; padding-bottom:.4em;" width="98%">
<p class="Standard">'I will never give him back these two young women.'</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">There are two ways we could analyse <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_wya" title="view language details">Wyandot</a>. First, since neither the irrealis prefix nor the contrastive are specifically negative, we could say that they do not count as negative morphemes. But that would mean that examples like (21b) and (21d) where the negative particle is not used would lack a negative morpheme. Under that view, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_wya" title="view language details">Wyandot</a> is an example of a language with optional single negation in which it would be possible to have negative clauses without a negative morpheme. An alternative view is that even though the negative and contrastive prefixes sometimes occur with nonnegative meaning, they still count as negative morphemes, since in some contexts they apparently convey specifically negative sense. I will opt here for the first view on the grounds that in cases where there is no negative particle, it appears to be the case that the specifically negative sense is not due to the meaning of the prefixes but due to the pragmatic context.</p>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionA1.14."></a>Type 14: Obligatory Double Negation</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 14 represents languages which employ obligatory double negation, where there are two morphemes simultaneously coding negation, as in (22) from <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_izi" title="view language details">Izi</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/nigercongo#igboid" title="Igboid">Igboid</a>, <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nigercongo" title="Niger-Congo">Niger-Congo</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/NG" title="view languages for country">Nigeria</a>), which contains both a preverbal negative word and a negative suffix.</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(22) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_izi" title="view language details">Izi</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Meier-et-al-1975" title="view reference details">Meier, Meier and Bendor-Samuel 1975</a>: 217)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>nwó!ké</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>té</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>è-pfú<b>-du</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>í!yá</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">man</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">3sg</span></span>-speak-<span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">3sg</span></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘The man is not speaking it.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">Note that the two morphemes in a Type 14 language need not occur on different sides of the verb. In <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_hdi" title="view language details">Hdi</a> (Chadic, <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/afroasiatic" title="Afro-Asiatic">Afro-Asiatic</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/CM" title="view languages for country">Cameroon</a> and <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/NG" title="view languages for country">Nigeria</a>), for example, there are two postverbal negative words, one immediately after the verb, the other in clause-final position, as in (23).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(23) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_hdi" title="view language details">Hdi</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Frajzyngier-and-Shay-2002" title="view reference details">Frajzyngier 2002</a>: 380)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ɗvà</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>‘á</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>xdí-xà</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>tá</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>l’école</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>wù.</b></i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">like</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><b><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></span></b></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">Hdi-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="plural">pl</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="object">obj</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">school</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><b><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></span></b></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="6" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘Hdi do not like school.’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">Such cases are unusual, however; it is far more common for multiple negative morphemes to occur on opposite sides of the verb. Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143B">143B</a> expands on different subtypes of Type 14, languages with obligatory double negation.</p>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionA1.15."></a>Type 15: Optional Double Negation</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 15 represents languages with optional double negation, in which it is possible to have two negative morphemes occurring simultaneously but in which it is also possible to have just one negative morpheme, as in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_mup" title="view language details">Mupun</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/afroasiatic#westchadic" title="West Chadic">West Chadic</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/NG" title="view languages for country">Nigeria</a>), illustrated in (24), where the preverbal negative word <i>ba</i>  is optional, while the clause-final negative word <i>kas</i>  is obligatory.</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(24) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_mup" title="view language details">Mupun</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Frajzyngier-1993" title="view reference details">Frajzyngier 1993</a>: 353)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>(ba)</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>kə̀</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>n=se</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>lua</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>nyer</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>kas</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><b><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></span></b></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">perf</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span>=eat</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">meat</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">bird</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><b><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></span></b></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="6" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I did not eat the bird meat.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">For the purposes of this chapter, a language is deemed to have optional double negation if it is possible to express negation with a single negative morpheme and if it is also possible to express negation by the use of two negative morphemes. An additional condition is that if the use of two negative morphemes is fairly rare in a given language, then the language is not classified as having optional double negation. Although it is difficult to give a precise definition for what counts as “rarely used”, two kinds of examples are (1) if the source says explicity that it is rarely used; and (2) if it is restricted to subordinate clauses or clauses containing nonindicative verbs.</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">There are in fact a variety of different ways in which a language can satisfy the criteria for optional double negation described above, some of which are worth discussing here. The simplest type of optional double negation is illustrated by the <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_blx" title="view language details">Biloxi</a> (<a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/siouan" title="Siouan">Siouan</a>; Mississippi) example in (25), where there is an obligatory postverbal negative word <i>ni</i>  and an optional negative prefix <i>k-</i>. This is the simplest case: there is one negative morpheme that always appears and a second negative morpheme that only sometimes appears. </p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(25) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_blx" title="view language details">Biloxi</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Einaudi-1976" title="view reference details">Einaudi 1976</a>: 86)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>k-</b>i-de</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ni</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b>-2sg</span>-go</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘You did not go.’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>I-de</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ni</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">2sg</span></span>-go</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘You did not go.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">The <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_mup" title="view language details">Mupun</a> example in (24) above also illustrates this sort of optional double negation.</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">A more complex case of optional double negation is represented by <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_kwo" title="view language details">Kwoma</a> (<a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/sepik" title="Sepik">Sepik</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/PG" title="view languages for country">Papua New Guinea</a>), illustrated in (26), where there is either double negation with a preverbal negative word and a negative suffix on the verb, as in (26a), or single negation, with just a negative suffix on the verb, as in (26b).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(26) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_kwo" title="view language details">Kwoma</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Kooyers-1974" title="view reference details">Kooyers 1974</a>: 50)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Rii</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>saka</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>i<b>-wak.</b></i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">3sg</span>.masc</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">go-<span class="T3"><b>pres.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘He didn’t go’ or ‘He isn’t going.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Rii</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>i<b>-kasakech</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">3sg</span>.masc</span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">go-<span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span>.tenseless</b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘He didn’t go.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">The <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_kwo" title="view language details">Kwoma</a> case differs from <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_mup" title="view language details">Mupun</a> and <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_blx" title="view language details">Biloxi</a> in that the negative morpheme that is used when there is single negation, <i>-kasakech</i>  in (26b), is different from the negative morpheme that occurs in the same position when there is double negation, <i>-wak</i>  in (26a). This illustrates that the term ‘optional’ is being used in an extended sense, to include situations like this one where the choice between the two constructions is determined grammatically and where there is no unique obligatory negative morpheme that occurs in both constructions. Rather, the term is being used broadly simply to refer to any situation where there are two possibilities, one with one negative morpheme and one with two negative morphemes.</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent"><a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_kwo" title="view language details">Kwoma</a> also differs from <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_mup" title="view language details">Mupun</a> and <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_blx" title="view language details">Biloxi</a> in that the choice between the two options, double negation and single negation, is determined grammatically in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_kwo" title="view language details">Kwoma</a>, but apparently by extragrammatical factors in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_mup" title="view language details">Mupun</a> and <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_blx" title="view language details">Biloxi</a>. In fact, it appears to be generally the case that whenever there is no unique negative morpheme shared by the two constructions, the choice between the two constructions will be determined grammatically, as in the case of <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_kwo" title="view language details">Kwoma</a>, while whenever the same negative morpheme occurs in both constructions, the choice between the two constructions will be determined by extragrammatical factors, as in the case of <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_blx" title="view language details">Biloxi</a> and <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_mup" title="view language details">Mupun</a>. However, there are occasional exceptions to this generalization. For example, in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_tar" title="view language details">Tariana</a> (<a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/arawakan" title="Arawakan">Arawakan</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/BR" title="view languages for country">Brazil</a>), stative verbs are negated with a negative suffix <i>-kade</i>, as in (27a), while nonstative verbs are negated with both a negative prefix <i>ma-</i>  and the negative suffix <i>-kade</i>, as in (27b). </p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(27) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_tar" title="view language details">Tariana</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Aikhenvald-2003" title="view reference details">Aikhenvald 2003</a>: 401, 400)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>nuha</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>keru<b>-kade</b>-mha</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">angry-<span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b>-pres.nonvis</span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I am not angry.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>yanaki</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ma</b>-ira<b>-kade</b>-mha</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">whiskey</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span>.past</b></span>-drink-<span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b>-pres.nonvis</span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I didn’t drink whiskey.’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">In other words, there is a unique morpheme shared by both constructions in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_tar" title="view language details">Tariana</a>, but the choice between the two constructions is grammatically conditioned.</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">In the case of <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_kwo" title="view language details">Kwoma</a>, although there is no unique negative morpheme involved in the two constructions, there is at least a unique morphosyntactic position which is filled in both constructions, albeit by different morphemes, namely a verbal suffix position, so there is at least an obligatorily filled negative position. A case not conforming to this pattern, however, is provided by <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_pkt" title="view language details">Pokot</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/nilosaharan#nilotic" title="Nilotic">Nilotic</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/KE" title="view languages for country">Kenya</a> and <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/UG" title="view languages for country">Uganda</a>), in which one construction involves a preverbal negative word, as in (28a), while the other involves the combination of a negative prefix and a negative suffix on the verb, as in (28b).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(28) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_pkt" title="view language details">Pokot</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Baroja-1989" title="view reference details">Baroja 1989</a>: 232, 233)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>melö</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>kï-rolyenecha</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="plural">1pl</span></span>-cough</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘We are not coughing.’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>m</b>-on-öma<b>-nye</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b>-1sg</span>-take-<span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I do not take.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">Two other instances of this type are <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_dun" title="view language details">Duna</a> (<a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/transnewguinea" title="Trans-New Guinea">Trans-New Guinea</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/PG" title="view languages for country">Papua New Guinea</a>) and <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_cop" title="view language details">Sahidic Coptic</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/afroasiatic#egyptiancoptic" title="Egyptian-Coptic">Egyptian Coptic</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/EG" title="view languages for country">Egypt</a>). <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_dun" title="view language details">Duna</a> is like <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_pkt" title="view language details">Pokot</a>, except that the construction involving a negative word places the negative word after the verb, as in (29).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(29) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_dun" title="view language details">Duna</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/San-Roque-2008" title="view reference details">San Roque 2008</a>: 303, 301)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>no</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>waki</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>neya</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">hear</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I didn’t hear.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>no</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>phuya</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>na</b>-na-<b>ya</b>-na</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">snake</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span>-eat-<span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b>-habit</span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I do not eat snake.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">In <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_cop" title="view language details">Sahidic Coptic</a>, there is either a negative prefix on the verb or a clause-initial negative word and a postverbal negative word (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Reintges-2004" title="view reference details">Reintges 2004</a>: 338, 346, 371).</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">All the cases of optional double negation discussed so far have involved two options, one involving two negatives, the other involving a single negative which usually, though not always, occurs in the position of one of the two negatives in the construction with two negatives. But a more complex possibility is provided by <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_nke" title="view language details">Nkem</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/nigercongo#bantoid" title="Bantoid">Bantu</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/NG" title="view languages for country">Nigeria</a>), illustrated in (30). In <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_nke" title="view language details">Nkem</a>, there are really three constructions, one of which involves two negative morphemes, the other two of which involve a single negative morpheme. The position of the single negative morpheme in each of these latter two constructions corresponds to the position of one of the two negative morphemes in the construction with two negative morphemes. In (30a), negation is expressed only by a negative suffix -dom on the verb. In (30b), negation is expressed only by a negative word <i>nɨ̂m</i>  preceding the verb. And in (30c), there is double negation, with both a negative suffix <i>-lom</i>  (a phonological variant of <i>-dom</i> ) and a preverbal negative word <i>kà</i>.</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(30) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_nke" title="view language details">Nkem</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Sibomana-1986" title="view reference details">Sibomana 1986</a>: 272, 274, 275)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ǹ</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>yéd<b>-dom</b></i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>í-tàb</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">see-<span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="noun class">nc</span></span>₄-house</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I did not see any house.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ǹ</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>nɨ̂m</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>gòn</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>í-tàb</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span>.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="future">fut</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">buy</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="noun class">nc</span></span>₄-house</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I will not buy any house.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">c.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ǹ</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>kà</b></i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>mál<b>-lom</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span></p>
</td><td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span>.pres</b></span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">finish-<span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I have not finished.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">A particularly complex type is provided by <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_mxx" title="view language details">Ayutla Mixe</a> (<a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/mixezoque" title="Mixe-Zoque">Mixe-Zoque</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/MX" title="view languages for country">Mexico</a>), in which there are three negative morphemes, all of which can occur alone and any two of which can occur together, but where apparently all three do not co-occur. Two of the negative morphemes, <i>ni</i>  and <i>ka’t</i>, are preverbal words, one of them illustrated in (31a), while the other negative morpheme, <i>ka-</i>, is a negative prefix, illustrated in (31b). Example (31c) illustrates the two negative words co-occurring, while (31d) illustrates one of the negative words co-occurring with the negative prefix.</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(31) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_mxx" title="view language details">Ayutla Mixe</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Romero-Mendez-2009" title="view reference details">Romero Méndez 2009</a>: 454, 451, 450, 449)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ka’t</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Carlos</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>t-kay-y=jëtë</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>më’ëky</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">Carlos</p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">3a</span>-eat.corn-<span class="T3">dep=before.now</span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">tamale</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="6" style="text-align:left; ">
<p class="Standard">‘Carlos did not eat tamale.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Carlos</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ka</b>-kay-p</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">Carlos</p>
</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">[<span class="T3">3s</span>]<span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span>-eat.corn-<span class="T3">indep</span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="6" style="text-align:left; ">
<p class="Standard">‘Carlos does not eat.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">c.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>jëë</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ni</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ka’t</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ëjts=ja’a</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>m-papa</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>n-uk-ta-jotkujk-ät-n</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="affirmative">aff</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg=dem</span>.d</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">2poss</span>-father</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">1a-pref-appl</span>-happy-<span class="T3">vrblz-perf</span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="6" style="text-align:left; ">
<p class="Standard">‘Yes, not even your dad could cheer me up...’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">d.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ni</b></i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>y-<b>ka</b>-ëxpëk-y=ja'a</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">3s-<b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span>-study-<span class="T3">dep=dem.d</span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="6" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘He did not study...’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143C">143C</a> shows different subtypes of languages with optional double negation.</p>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionA1.16."></a>Type 16: Optional triple negation with obligatory double negation</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Types 16 and 17 involve languages with optional triple negation, Type 16 languages being those with obligatory double negation, Type 17 those with optional double negation. In other words, Type 16 languages employ either two or three negatives, while Type 17 languages employ one, two, or three. An example of a Type 16 language is <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_gnb" title="view language details">Gunbalang</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/australian#gunwinygic" title="Gunwinygic">Gunwinygic</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/AU" title="view languages for country">Australia</a>), illustrated in (32). Example (32a) involves double negation: there is both a negative prefix and a negative suffix. But (32b) involves not only the same prefix and suffix but also an additional negative word <i>ngunta</i>  preceding the verb.</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(32) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_gnb" title="view language details">Gunbalang</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Harris-1969b" title="view reference details">Harris 1969b</a>: 35)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ngayi</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ngarra</b>-kirta<b>-ng</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span>.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span>-go-<span class="T3">past<b>.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I didn't go.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ngayi</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ngunta</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>korro-kenta</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ngarra</b>-kirta<b>-ng</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="locative">loc</span>.to</span>-there</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span>.<b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span>-go-<span class="T3">past<b>.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">'I didn't go down there.'</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionA1.17."></a>Type 17: Optional triple negation with optional double negation</h4>
<p class="Textbody">The sample of languages for this chapter contains only one instance of a Type 17 language, one with optional double and optional triple negation, namely <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_kwt" title="view language details">Kwomtari</a> (<a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/kwomtaribaibai" title="Kwomtari-Baibai">Kwomtari-Baibai</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/PG" title="view languages for country">Papua New Guinea</a>), illustrated in (33). All four options involve a preverbal negative word <i>glei</i>. The first option, shown in (33a), involves this word in combination with both a negative suffix <i>-i</i>  on the verb and a postverbal negative word <i>mwa</i>. The second option, shown in (33b), involves this preverbal word in combination with just the negative suffix <i>-i</i>  on the verb. The third option, shown in (33c), involves this preverbal word in combination with just the postverbal negative word <i>mwa</i>. And the fourth option involves the preverbal word alone.</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(33) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_kwt" title="view language details">Kwomtari</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Spencer-2008" title="view reference details">Spencer 2008</a>: 124, 151, 151, 151)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Mena</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>nebue</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>glei</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>amwi</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>a-la-ne<b>-i</b></i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>mwa</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="plural">1pl</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">now</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">good</p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">do-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="proximal/proximate">prox</span>.dur-1pl<b>-neg</b></span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="9" style="text-align:left; padding-bottom:0.6em;">
<p class="Standard">‘Now we don’t do it well.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Inalilufwa</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>glei</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Pita-le</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ri-ne-ke</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>feta-ne-a-ne<b>-i</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">people</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">Peter<span class="T3">-obj</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">come-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="plural">3pl-seq</span></span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">see-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="plural">3pl</span></span>-do-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="plural">3pl</span><b>-neg</b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="9" style="text-align:left; padding-bottom:0.6em;">
<p class="Standard">‘The people did not habitually come and look at Peter.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">c.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Kame</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>glei</b></i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>tuwa-po-ne-ke</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>fu-po-ne-a-ne</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>mwa</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">only</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">carry.away-<span class="T3">distr-3pl-seq</span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">tie-<span class="T3">distr-3pl</span>-do-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="plural">3pl</span></span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="9" style="text-align:left; padding-bottom:0.6em;">
<p class="Standard">‘They didn’t just carry them away and tie them.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">d.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Eete-geni</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>lufwa</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>glei</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Aie</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="50">
<p class="Standard"><i>Gote-le</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>arie</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>nuboue</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>le-fo-lee</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">here-thing</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">man</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">father</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">God-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="object">obj</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">stomach</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">good</p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">do-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">3sg</span>.obj-3sg.subj</span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="9" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘This man didn’t love father God.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143D">143D</a> shows languages with both of these two types of triple negation.</p>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionA1.m."></a>Further discussion of feature values</h4>
<p class="Textbody">It should be noted that in examining the position of negative morphemes for this chapter, we ignore the fact that the structure of negative clauses is often more complex than simply adding a negative morpheme, as discussed in Chapter <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/chapter/114">114</a> and <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Miestamo-2005" title="view reference details">Miestamo (2005)</a>. For example, in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_hix" title="view language details">Hixkaryana</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/cariban#cariban" title="Cariban">Cariban</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/BR" title="view languages for country">Brazil</a>), illustrated in (34), the negative construction also involves the addition of a form of the verb for ‘be’.</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(34) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_hix" title="view language details">Hixkaryana</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Derbyshire-1979" title="view reference details">Derbyshire 1979</a>: 48, cited by <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Miestamo-2005" title="view reference details">Miestamo 2005</a>: 462)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>k-amryek-no</i>.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>amryek<b>-hra</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>w-ah-ko</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">1.subj</span>-hunt-<span class="T3">imm.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="past">pst</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">hunt-<span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">1.<span class="T3">subj</span>-be-<span class="T3">imm.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="past">pst</span></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I went hunting.’</p></td>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I did not go hunting.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">In cases like this, the position of the negative morpheme can really only be understood in the context of the overall negative construction. Simply talking about negative morphemes here misses the point that what we really have here is a negative construction, not just a negative morpheme. Similarly, in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_tao" title="view language details">Tarao</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/sinotibetan#kukichin" title="Kuki-Chin">Kuki-Chin</a>, Tibeto-Burman; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/IN" title="view languages for country">India</a>), negation is expressed not only by the use of a negative suffix, but also by the absence of subject prefixes which are used in affirmative clauses, as illustrated in (35), where not only does (35b) employ a negative suffix, but the subject prefix <i>ki-</i>  ‘<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span>’ that is used in the affirmative sentence in (35a) is absent in the negative sentence in (35b).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(35) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_tao" title="view language details">Tarao</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Singh-2002" title="view reference details">Singh 2002</a>: 91)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>kəy</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>bu</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ki-sak.</i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">rice</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span>-eat</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I eat rice.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>kəy</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>bu</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>sak<b>-no</b>-əŋ</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">rice</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">eat-<span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b>-habit</span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I do not eat rice.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">This chapter only examines the position of negative morphemes with respect to the verb, so this aspect of negative constructions is not taken into account here, nor in Chapter <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/chapter/144">144</a>.</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">Note that to count as a negative morpheme, a morpheme has to be specifically negative in meaning. In some languages with double negation, the negative construction requires, in addition to a negative morpheme, a second morpheme with irrealis meaning or something similar, but which is not specifically negative in that it also occurs in nonnegative contexts. For example, in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ala" title="view language details">Alamblak</a> (<a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/sepik" title="Sepik">Sepik</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/PG" title="view languages for country">Papua New Guinea</a>), negative clauses differ from corresponding affirmative clauses in the use of a preverbal negative word and obligatory irrealis suffix on the verb, as in (36a). However, irrealis mood also occurs in a number of nonnegative contexts, such as counterfactual conditionals, where both clauses are marked irrealis, as in (36b).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(36) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ala" title="view language details">Alamblak</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Bruce-1984" title="view reference details">Bruce 1984</a>: 198, 138)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>fiñji</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>tëh-r-më-m</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>bus=kor=t</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b>.nonfut</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">stand-<span class="T3">irreal-rec.past-3pl</span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">forest=<span class="T3">adess=3sg.fem</span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘They did not live in the forest.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>a-i-kah-n-n</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>hik-r-fë-an-n</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="hortative">hort</span></span>-go-<span class="T3">irreal-2sg-dep</span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">follow-<span class="T3">irreal-immed.past-1sg-2sg</span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘If you had gone (and you should have), I would have followed you.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">Although the use of irrealis in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ala" title="view language details">Alamblak</a> can be considered part of the negative construction, the irrealis morpheme is not treated as a negative morpheme because it is not specifically negative, and thus <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ala" title="view language details">Alamblak</a> is not treated as a case of double negation.</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">The case of <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_wya" title="view language details">Wyandot</a> discussed above and illustrated in (21) above is an instance of a language in which it is possible to have negative clauses without a negative morpheme because although the language does have a negative morpheme, that single negative morpheme is optional. However, a more extreme logical possibility that is not clearly attested in the sample is a language in which there is no morpheme that can be considered a negative morpheme. There are many logically possible ways in which this might arise. A language might use a different word order for coding negation, the way a few languages code polar questions (see Chapter <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/chapter/116">116</a>). There are languages which employ a different word order in negative clauses (see Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/144B">144B</a>), but these all involve negative morphemes as well. Another way a language might lack a negative morpheme would be if it had an affirmative morpheme that is absent in negative clauses (again parallel to what we find in a few languages for polar questions). Or a language might employ two morphemes in negative clauses, neither of which is specifically negative, because both occur in nonnegative clauses, but which only occur together in negative clauses. The closest case of a language of this sort that I am aware of is <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_igb" title="view language details">Igbo</a> (Benue-Congo; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/NG" title="view languages for country">Nigeria</a>), which is not in my sample for this chapter because the complete facts are not clear to me from my sources. My description here follows <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Miestamo-2005" title="view reference details">Miestamo’s (2005</a>: 119-120) interpretation of negation in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_igb" title="view language details">Igbo</a>. There are three ways in which negation is coded in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_igb" title="view language details">Igbo</a>. First, there is a suffix <i>‑ghɪ̀</i>, illustrated in (37a), which some sources describe as a negative suffix, but which apparently occurs occasionally in nonnegative clauses, so it is not considered a negative morpheme for the purposes of this chapter. Second there is a prefix <i>a-</i>, illustrated in (37b), that occurs in negative imperfective clauses in which the subject is not a singular pronoun. However, in perfective clauses, this prefix occurs on the verb only if the clause is <i>not</i>  negative, illustrated in (37c), where it is glossed here as ‘<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="prefix">pref</span></span>’ for ‘prefix, so it also cannot be considered a purely negative morpheme. Finally, there are tonal differences between verbs in affirmative and negative clauses, illustrated by the differences between the tones on the two verbs in (37c); however, what is not clear is whether there is a particular tone that can be considered a marker of negation, as opposed to there being tonal differences but where the tones in negative clauses occur in nonnegative clauses in a way that would mean that tone cannot be considered a purely negative morpheme either.</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(37) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_igb" title="view language details">Igbo</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Emenanjo-1978" title="view reference details">Emenanjo 1978</a>: 173; <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Miestamo-2005" title="view reference details">Miestamo 2005</a>: 119)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Ọ̀</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="28">
<p class="Standard"><i>chọ<b>-ghị̄</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>egō</i>.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">3sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">want-<b>‘<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></span>’</b></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">money</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘He does not want money.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Àda</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;" width="128">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>a</b>-chọ-ghị̄</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>egō</i>.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">3sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><b>‘<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></span>’</b>-want-<b>‘<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></span>’</b></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">money</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="6" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘Ada does not want money.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">c.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>...</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>anyɪ̀</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>à-cɪ-a</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>hà</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>cɪ̀-<b>ghɪ̀</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="plural">1pl</span></span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="prefix">pref</span></span>-carry-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="completive">compl</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="plural">3pl</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">carry.<b><span class="T3">neg-‘neg’</span></b></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="6" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘We carried some but they did not.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">If there is not a specific tone that can be considered a marker of negation, then <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_igb" title="view language details">Igbo</a> would count as a language without any morpheme that is specifically negative.</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">Not all instances of two negative morphemes are counted as double negation. Instances of two negative prefixes or two negative suffixes are not counted as double negation, even if other morphemes can intervene. For example, in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ven" title="view language details">Venda</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/nigercongo#bantoid" title="Bantoid">Bantu</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/ZA" title="view languages for country">South Africa</a> and <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/ZW" title="view languages for country">Zimbabwe</a>), illustrated in (38), there are two negative prefixes, separated by a subject noun class prefix; but this is not treated as double negation.</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(38) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ven" title="view language details">Venda</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Poulos-1990" title="view reference details">Poulos 1990</a>: 216)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>mmbwa</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>a</b>-yo-<b>ngo</b>-luma</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>nwana</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">dog</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b>-nc-neg.perf</span>-bite</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">child</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘The dog did not bite the child.’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">On the other hand, separate negative words, as opposed to affixes, are treated as double negation if they occur in different syntactic positions, where words can occur between them, as in (39) from <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_baf" title="view language details">Bafut</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/nigercongo#bantoid" title="Bantoid">Bantu</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/CM" title="view languages for country">Cameroon</a>), where one negative word precedes the subject and the other follows.</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(39) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_baf" title="view language details">Bafut</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Chumbow-and-Tamanji-1994" title="view reference details">Chumbow and Tamanji 1994</a>: 215)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>Kāā</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Ngwà</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>sɨ̀</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ndá</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>bɔ̄ɔ̀</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">Ngwa</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">house</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">build</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘Ngwa has not built a house.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">Another example is presented by <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_bre" title="view language details">Breton</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/indoeuropean#celtic" title="Celtic">Celtic</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/FR" title="view languages for country">France</a>), where two negative words bracket the inflected verb. When there is no auxiliary, these words bracket the main verb, as in (40a); however, when there is an auxiliary verb, they bracket the auxiliary verb, as in (40b) (where the first one cliticizes onto the auxiliary verb).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(40) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_bre" title="view language details">Breton</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Schafer-1995" title="view reference details">Schafer 1995</a>: 157, 168)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Ar</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>vugale</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ne</b></i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>dastumont</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ket</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>bleunviou</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>kichen</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ar</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>waz</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="definite">def</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">children</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">collect</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">flowers</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">by</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="definite">def</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">stream</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="10" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘The children do not collect flowers by the stream.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Lan</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>n=</b>eo</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ket</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>aet</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>er</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>c’hav</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>...</i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">Alan</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b>neg=</b></span>be</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">gone</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">in</p>
</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">cave</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="10" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘Alan didn’t go into the cave ...’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">It is the example in (40b) that illustrates the point in question. Namely, the two negative words in (40b) cannot be adjacent to each other because the auxiliary verb must occur between them. The fact that they cannot occur adjacent to each other means that this is counted as double negation, so <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_bre" title="view language details">Breton</a> is considered a language with obligatory, not optional, double negation.</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">In contrast, in one of the negative constructions in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_doy" title="view language details">Doyayo</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/nigercongo#adamawa" title="Adamawa">Adamawa</a>, <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nigercongo" title="Niger-Congo">Niger-Congo</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/CM" title="view languages for country">Cameroon</a>), negation is coded both by the preverbal negative word <i>taa¹²</i>  and by high tone on the preceding subject pronoun <i>hi¹</i>, as illustrated in (41). Each of these alone would count as a preverbal negative word, but they both precede the verb without the possibility of a phrase occurring between them, so this is not counted as double negation. (However, this construction does involve double negation for a different reason; namely, negation is also coded by the tone on the incompletive suffix <i>-ko³</i> ). If a word could be inserted between <i>hi</i>  and <i>taa</i>, this would count as triple negation.</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(41) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_doy" title="view language details">Doyayo</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Wiering-and-Wiering-1994" title="view reference details">Wiering and Wiering 1994</a>: 81)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>hi¹</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>taa¹²</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>zaa¹-<b>ko³</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="plural">3pl</span>.<b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">be.<span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">come-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="incompletive">incompl</span>.<b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘They will not come.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<h3 class="heading-2">
<a name="A2._Theoretical_discussion"></a>A2. Theoretical discussion</h3>
<p class="Textbody">As noted above, the most frequent type by far is Type 1, with preverbal negative words. Not only is Type 1 by far the most frequent, but when one adds in Types 6, 7, and 8, in which one of the options involves preverbal negative words, as well as the subset of languages of Types 13 to 16 with double or triple negation that involve preverbal negative words (more specifically Types 1, 2, 7, 8, and 10 to 15 on Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143B">143B</a>, Types 1 to 4, 11 to 14, 16 to 20, and 22 on Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143C">143C</a>, and Types 1 and 3 through 6 on Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143D">143D</a>; see also Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143E">143E</a> below), these make up a majority of the languages on the map. Although we can observe this preference for preverbal negative words over postverbal negative words, we do not find any significant difference between the frequency of negative prefixes and negative suffixes. However, this can probably be attributed to the general crosslinguistic suffixing preference, which competes with the preference for preverbal negative morphemes, thus resulting in roughly equal numbers of the two types of languages with negative affixes.</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">Languages with obligatory double negation (Type 14) make up approximately 9% of the languages in the sample, while those with optional double negation (Type 15) make up about 6% of the sample, so that approximately 15% of languages have optional or obligatory double negation.</p>
<h3 class="heading-2">
<a name="A3._Geographical_distribution"></a>A3. Geographical distribution</h3>
<p class="Textbody">Languages with preverbal negative words are the dominant type and they are found across the globe. Languages with postverbal negative words show a much more clearly defined geographical distribution, a point which is discussed in more detail in the discussion of Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/144D">144D</a> in the next chapter, since the primary source of the geographical pattern is SVONeg languages. The clearest area in which languages with postverbal negative words are found is central Africa, with a second smaller area around New Guinea. Languages with negative prefixes are especially common in Africa, more specifically centered around east Africa, most of these languages being Bantu languages. Negative prefixes are also common in an area around northeast India, primarily among Tibeto-Burman languages. The largest concentration of languages with negative suffixes is in the northern half of South America. Languages with double negation (either obligatory or optional) are notable for their low frequency in Eurasia. </p>
<h2 class="heading-1"><a name="143B"></a><b>Map 143B: Obligatory Double Negation</b></h2>
<div style="text-align:left">
<table class="table table-hover values" id="value-table-143B" style="width: auto;">__values_143B__</table>
</div>
<p class="Textbody">Double negation involves constructions with two negative morphemes. However, as discussed in more detail above, two prefixes or two suffixes are not counted as double negation and two negative words are not treated as double negation if they obligatorily occur adjacent to each other. If material can occur between two negative words, then these words are counted as being an instance of double negation.</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143B">143B</a> examines more deeply different subtypes of languages with obligatory double negation. Types 1 through 4 are ones in which the two negative morphemes are either separate words or affixes on opposite sides of the verb. Types 5 and 6 represent languages with obligatory double negation where one of the two negative morphemes is tonal. Types 7 to 9 represent languages where the two negative morphemes occur on the same side of the verb. Types 10 to 15 represent mixed subtypes, subtypes that involve two of the types in Types 1 to 9. Type 16 represents all languages with obligatory double negation with optional triple negation; their subtypes are shown on Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143D">143D</a>.</p>
<h3 class="heading-2">
<a name="B1._Defining_the_values"></a>B1. Defining the values</h3>
<p class="Textbody">For each of the two negative morphemes, there are the following two parameters: (1) is the morpheme a separate word or an affix? (2) does it precede or follow the verb or verb stem? The first four types on Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143B">143B</a> represent the four logical possibilities among languages in which one negative morpheme precedes the verb and the other follows, varying by these two parameters as to whether the morpheme that precedes the verb or verb stem is a separate word or a prefix and whether the morpheme that follows the verb is a separate word or a suffix. </p>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionB1.1."></a>Type 1: NegVNeg</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 1 represents languages where both negative morphemes are separate words, on opposite sides of the verb. Example (42) from <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_abu" title="view language details">Abun</a> (<a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/westpapuan" title="West Papuan">West Papuan</a>; Papua, <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/ID" title="view languages for country">Indonesia</a>) illustrates a language of this type. </p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(42) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_abu" title="view language details">Abun</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Berry-and-Berry-1999" title="view reference details">Berry and Berry 1999</a>: 136)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Ye</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>yo</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>syo</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>sugum</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>nai</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ji</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>nde</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="plural">3pl</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">give</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">money</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3" style="font-family:'Times New Roman';"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="indirect object ">io</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="7" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘They did not give money to me.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionB1.2."></a>Type 2: Neg[V-Neg]</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 2 represents languages with a preverbal negative word and a negative suffix on the verb. Example (22) above from <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_izi" title="view language details">Izi</a> illustrates a language of this type, as does <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_bae" title="view language details">Baré</a> (<a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/arawakan" title="Arawakan">Arawakan</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/BR" title="view languages for country">Brazil</a> and <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/VR" title="view languages for country">Venezuela</a>), illustrated in (43). </p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(43) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_bae" title="view language details">Baré</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Aikhenvald-1996" title="view reference details">Aikhenvald 1996</a>: 36)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>nu-diʧa-ɻe</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>hena</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>i-hiwa<b>-waka</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>a-wakhid’a-sa</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>i-hieta-ni</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span>-son-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="possessive">poss</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">3sg</span>.masc</span>-go-<span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">indef</span>-pass-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="causative">caus</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">3sg</span>.masc</span>-holiday-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="possessive">poss</span></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘My son did not go away to spend his holiday.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionB1.3."></a>Type 3: [Neg-V]Neg</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 3 represents languages where the negative morpheme preceding the verb or verb stem is an prefix while the one following is a separate word. Example (44) from <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_kbw" title="view language details">Bwe Karen</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/sinotibetan#karen" title="Karen">Karen</a>, Tibeto-Burman; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/MM" title="view languages for country">Myanmar</a>) illustrates this type.</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(44) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_kbw" title="view language details">Bwe Karen</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Henderson-1997" title="view reference details">Henderson 1997</a>: 247)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>dɛ</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ə-mu</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>dəlà-yo</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>yə-<b>də-</b>θə́’ɛ́</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ə-mi</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>nɔ</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">thing</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">poss’d</span>-plant</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">plur</span>-this</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg-</span><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span>-know</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">poss’d</span>-name</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="6" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘These plants, I don’t know their names.’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionB1.4."></a>Type 4: [Neg-V-Neg]</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 4 represents languages where both negative morphemes are affixes, one a prefix, the other a suffix, as in (45) from <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_lim" title="view language details">Limbu</a> (Tibeto-Burman; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/BT" title="view languages for country">Bhutan</a>, <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/IN" title="view languages for country">India</a>, and <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/NP" title="view languages for country">Nepal</a>).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(45) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_lim" title="view language details">Limbu</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/van-Driem-1987" title="view reference details">van Driem 1987</a>: 91)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>allɔ</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>nam</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>mɛ-</b>se·k-<b>nɛn</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">now</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">sun</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span>-shine-<span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘The sun is not shining now.’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionB1.5."></a>Type 5: VNeg + Negative tone on V</h4>
<p class="Textbody">The remaining ten types are less frequent. Type 5 represents one language with double negation which combines a separate negative word following the verb with a distinctive negative tone on the verb. This language, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ble" title="view language details">Baule</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/nigercongo#kwa" title="Kwa">Kwa</a>, <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nigercongo" title="Niger-Congo">Niger-Congo</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/CI" title="view languages for country">Côte d'Ivoire</a>), is illustrated in (46); (46a) illustrates a negative present tense sentence, while (46b) illustrates an affirmative present tense sentence and (46c) an affirmative future tense sentence. </p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(46) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ble" title="view language details">Baule</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Carteron-1972" title="view reference details">Carteron 1972</a>: 69, 65, 65)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ó</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>nián</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>mán</b></i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">3sg</span>.<b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">look.<span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘he is not looking’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ò</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>niǎn</i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">3sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">look</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘he is looking’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">c.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ó</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>niān</i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">3sg</span>.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="future">fut</span></span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">look.<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="future">fut</span></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘he will look’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">Note that the tone on the verb <i>nian</i>  ‘look’ is different in all three examples, with a distinctive high tone in (46a) marking the verb as negative in combination with the postverbal negative word <i>mán</i>. The tone on the subject pronoun <i>o</i>  also differs in (46a) and (46b), so <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ble" title="view language details">Baule</a> might be treated as a language with triple negation. Two alternative approaches are (1) to view the high tone on the subject pronoun as the spreading of high tone from the verb so that there is really only one high tone spread over the subject pronoun and the verb; or (2) the tone on the subject pronouns seems to be high for negative and future clauses and low for past and present so it could be analysed as irrealis versus realis, so the high tone on the subject pronoun is not specifically negative. I assume that one of these is the correct view and therefore regard <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ble" title="view language details">Baule</a> as having just double negation, not triple negation.</p>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionB1.6."></a>Type 6: [Neg-V] and negative tone on verb</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 6 represents languages in which the double negation involves the combination of a negative prefix and negative tone on the verb. In <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_deg" title="view language details">Degema</a> (Benue-Congo; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/NG" title="view languages for country">Nigeria</a>), negation is coded by a combination of prefixes and tone on the verb, as in (47), where (47a) shows an affirmative clause and (47b) the corresponding negative clause. Observe the different subject prefixes and the different tones on the verbs.</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(47) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_deg" title="view language details">Degema</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Kari-1997" title="view reference details">Kari 1997</a>, cited by <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Miestamo-2005" title="view reference details">Miestamo 2005</a>: 272)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>mó-síré</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">3sg</span></span>-run</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘He is running.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ó</b>-sire</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">3sg</span>.<b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span>-run</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘He is not running.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionB1.n."></a>Types 7 - 9: Obligatory double negation on same side of verb</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Types 7 to 9 represent languages with obligatory double negation where the two negative morphemes occur on the same side of the verb or verb stem. There are four logically possible ways this might arise, differing along two parameters in a way similar to the way Types 1 to 4 differ: (1) do they both precede or do they both follow the verb or verb stem? and (2) are they both separate words? or is one of them an affix? Only three of these four logical possibilities are attested, namely Types 7 to 9; there is no instance in the sample of a language with a negative suffix and a negative word following the verb. </p>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionB1.7."></a>Type 7: NegNegV</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 7 represents languages in which the negative morphemes are both separate words that precede the verb. There is only one language of this type in the sample, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_baf" title="view language details">Bafut</a>, illustrated above in (39). </p>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionB1.8."></a>Type 8: NegNeg-V</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 8 represents languages with one negative word preceding the verb plus a negative prefix. An example of a language of this type is <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_sal" title="view language details">Salinan</a> (<a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/salinan" title="Salinan">Salinan</a>; California), illustrated in (48).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(48) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_sal" title="view language details">Salinan</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Turner-1987" title="view reference details">Turner 1987</a>: 132)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>káraʔ</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>káʔa</b>-sax</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="plural">1pl</span>.<b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span>-eat</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘We did not eat it.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionB1.9."></a>Type 9: VNegNeg</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 9 represents languages with two negative words following the verb. There are two languages of this sort in the sample, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_hdi" title="view language details">Hdi</a>, illustrated above in (23), and <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_zan" title="view language details">Zande</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/nigercongo#ubangi" title="Ubangi">Ubangi</a>, <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nigercongo" title="Niger-Congo">Niger-Congo</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/CD" title="view languages for country">Democratic Republic of Congo</a>, <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/CF" title="view languages for country">Central African Republic</a>, and <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/SD" title="view languages for country">Sudan</a>), illustrated in (49).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(49) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_zan" title="view language details">Zande</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Tucker-and-Bryan-1966" title="view reference details">Tucker and Bryan 1966</a>: 155)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>mì-mä̀ŋgì̧</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ŋgâ</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>sÚŋgɛ</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>tɛ̀</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span>-do.<span class="T3">perf</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">work</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I am not doing work.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionB1.m."></a>Types 10 - 15: Mixed types</h4>
<p class="Textbody">The next six types represent mixed types, that is languages with two different negative constructions, neither of which is clearly dominant, but each of which falls into one of the above nine types. </p>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionB1.10."></a>Type 10: NegVNeg / Neg[V-Neg]</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 10 represents languages that combine Types 1 and 2. In other words, they have one construction with a negative word preceding and a negative word following and a second construction with a negative word preceding and a negative suffix. There is one language of this type, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_awp" title="view language details">Awa Pit</a> (<a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/barbacoan" title="Barbacoan">Barbacoan</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/CO" title="view languages for country">Colombia</a> and <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/EC" title="view languages for country">Ecuador</a>), illustrated in (50). There is a negative word <i>shi</i>  preceding the verb in both (50a) and (50b), but there is a postverbal separate word <i>ki</i>  in (50a) and a suffix <i>-ma</i>  in (50b).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(50) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_awp" title="view language details">Awa Pit</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Curnow-1997" title="view reference details">Curnow 1997</a>: 332, 334)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="40">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>Shi</b></i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;" width="100">
<p class="Standard"><i>pana</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ki</b></i>.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="40">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;" width="100">
<p class="Standard">stand:<span class="T3">imperf.ptcpl</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">be:<span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b>.nonlocut</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘She is not standing.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;" width="100">
<p class="Standard"><i>Santos=na</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="40">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>shi</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ɨ-<b>ma</b>- y</i>.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;" width="100">
<p class="Standard">Santos=<span class="T3">topic</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;" width="40">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">go-<span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b>-nonlocut</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘Santos did not go.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionB1.11."></a>Type 11: NegVNeg / [Neg-V]Neg</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 11 contains a single language, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_luv" title="view language details">Luvale</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/nigercongo#bantoid" title="Bantoid">Bantu</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/AO" title="view languages for country">Angola</a>), that combines Types 1 and 3. It has two constructions containing a negative word (actually a clitic) following the verb but the two constructions differ in that one has a negative prefix, illustrated in (51a), while the other has a negative word preceding the verb, illustrated in (51b).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(51) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_luv" title="view language details">Luvale</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Horton-1949" title="view reference details">Horton 1949</a>: 134, 127)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>Ka</b>-va-wanyine</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>[vy-uma</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>vize</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>va-tondele]<b>=ko</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b>-nc₁.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="plural">pl</span></span>-find?</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">nc₄.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="plural">pl</span></span>-thing?</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">nc₄.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="plural">pl</span></span>-that.yonder</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">nc₁.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="plural">pl</span></span>-seek?<span class="T3"><b>=neg</b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘They did not find those things they sought.’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>Kexi</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>kw-iza</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ku-xikola<b>=ko</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="infinitive">inf</span></span>-come</p>
</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="locative">loc</span></span>-school<span class="T3"><b>=neg</b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘He does not come to school.’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionB1.12."></a>Type 12: NegVNeg / VNeg + Negative tone on V</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 12 represents languages which have a negative word following the verb and either a negative word preceding the verb or negative tone on the verb. The sole instance of a language of this type is <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_kis" title="view language details">Kisi</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/nigercongo#southernatlantic" title="Southern Atlantic">Southern Atlantic</a>, <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nigercongo" title="Niger-Congo">Niger-Congo</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/GN" title="view languages for country">Guinea</a>, <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/LR" title="view languages for country">Liberia</a>, and <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/SL" title="view languages for country">Sierra Leone</a>), illustrated in (52). In <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_kis" title="view language details">Kisi</a>, the word order is SVO in clauses without an auxiliary verb, and when such clauses are negative, there is a clause-final negative word plus distinct negative tone on the verb, as in (52a). When there is an auxiliary verb, the word order is SAuxOV, and when such clauses are negative, the same clause-final negative word occurs, in addition to either negative tone on the auxiliary verb, as in (52b), or a distinct negative auxiliary verb, as in (52c). These last two cases both count as NegVNeg; the distinct negative tone on the auxiliary verb still counts as a negative word, since the entire auxiliary verb in this case counts as a negative word, albeit one that codes other information as well; as discussed above (and in Chapter <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/chapter/112">112</a>), morphemes coding negation in addition to other information are not distinguished from those coding only negation.</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(52) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_kis" title="view language details">Kisi</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Childs-1995" title="view reference details">Childs 1995</a>: 260, 233, 234)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>wàŋndó</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>hɛ̀náŋ</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>pò</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>kóŋ</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>lé</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">person</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">love.<span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">man</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">that</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘Nobody loves that man.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ò</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>có</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>lɛɛŋndó</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>yìkpà</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>lé</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">3sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">pres.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="progressive">prog</span>.<b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">machete</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">sharpen</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘She is not sharpening the machete.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">c.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ò</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>wé</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>wàŋndá</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>kùìndìkùìndìó</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>lé</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">3sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">past.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="progressive">prog</span>.<b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">people</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">hit</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘He was not striking the people.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionB1.13."></a>Type 13: NegVNeg / NegNegV</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 13 represents languages in which there are two negative words, where either they occur on opposite sides of the verb or both precede the verb. The sole instance of a language of this type is <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_bre" title="view language details">Breton</a>, illustrated above in (40).</p>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionB1.14."></a>Type 14: NegVNeg / VNegNeg</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 14 represents languages which have either a negative word preceding the verb and a negative word following the verb or two negative words both following the verb (but not necessarily adjacent). The sole instance in the sample of a language of this type is <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_miy" title="view language details">Miya</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/afroasiatic#westchadic" title="West Chadic">West Chadic</a>, <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/afroasiatic" title="Afro-Asiatic">Afro-Asiatic</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/NG" title="view languages for country">Nigeria</a>), illustrated in (53), where (53a) illustrates a negative word preceding the verb and one following the verb, while (53b) illustrates two negative words following the verb, but separated, in this instance, by both the object and the subject.</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(53) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_miy" title="view language details">Miya</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Schuh-1998" title="view reference details">Schuh 1998</a>: 281)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>tə́́</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>má</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>tə̀nzə</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>márɗ</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>áa</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Ndùwyá<b>=w</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">he</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">plant</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">millet</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">subj</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">Nduya<span class="T3"><b>=neg</b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="6" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘Nduya will not plant millet.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>à</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>tənzə</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>má</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>màrɗ</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>áa</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Ndùwyá<b>=w</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">perf</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">plant</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">millet</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">subj</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">Nduya<span class="T3"><b>=neg</b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="6" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘Nduya did not plant millet.’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionB1.15."></a>Type 15: Neg[V-Neg ]/ [Neg-V-Neg]</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 15 represents languages in which both constructions employ a negative suffix, where one employs a negative word preceding the verb and the other employs a negative prefix. The sole instance of this type in the sample is <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_trm" title="view language details">Tirmaga</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/nilosaharan#surmic" title="Surmic">Surmic</a>, <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nilosaharan" title="Nilo-Saharan">Nilo-Saharan</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/ET" title="view languages for country">Ethiopia</a>), illustrated in (54), where the construction in (54a) is used for the imperfective aspect, the one in (54b) for the perfective.</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(54) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_trm" title="view language details">Tirmaga</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Bryant-1999" title="view reference details">Bryant 1999</a>: 112, 111)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ná</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>tɛ́r-o</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ŋani</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>kú-dúrí-t<b>-to</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">and</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">woman-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="plural">pl</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">3subj</span>-dance.<span class="T3">perf-pl.subj-<b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘And the women had not danced yet.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>mɛ́á</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>gesó</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ŋa</b>-kí-hín-i<b>-o</b>-cí</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">now</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">beer</p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b>-1subj</span>-want.<span class="T3">imperf-sg.subj-<b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b>-emph</span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘Now, I don’t want beer.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionB1.16."></a>Type 16: Obligatory double negation with optional triple negation</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 16 represents languages with obligatory double negation but with the option of triple negation. These languages are expanded upon below on Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143D">143D</a>.</p>
<h3 class="heading-2">
<a name="B2._Theoretical_discussion"></a>B2. Theoretical discussion</h3>
<p class="Textbody">The first four types on Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143B">143B</a>, those involving negative words and negative affixes on opposite sides of the verb or verb stem, are the most common types. It is clear that double negation typically involves morphemes on opposite sides of the verb. The sample contains 36 languages with negative words on opposite sides of the verb (Type 1), but only 4 (Types 7 and 9) where the two words occur on the same side of the verb. Furthermore, if the language has a preverbal negative word and a negative affix, then that affix is more likely to be a suffix (Type 2; 28 languages) than a prefix (Type 8; 2 languages). And if the language has a postverbal negative word and a negative affix, then that affix is more likely to be a prefix (Type 3; 9 languages) than a suffix (unattested).</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">Among the first four types, one type is distinctly less common than the other three, namely Type 3 involving a negative prefix and a postverbal negative word. It is not surprising that this type is less common than Types 1 and 2, since these last two types involve preverbal negative words, and as shown on Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143A">143A</a>, these are much more common than languages with postverbal negative words or negative prefixes or suffixes. It is less obvious why Type 3 is less common than Type 4, languages in which there is a negative prefix and a negative suffix. On Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143A">143A</a>, we saw that in languages with a single negative morpheme, it is much more common for this negative to be a separate word preceding the verb, while the other three basic types (a separate word following the verb, a prefix, and a suffix) are all about equally common. That might lead us to expect that in languages with double negation, those involving a separate word preceding the verb would be more common than those that do not involve such, where the negative morpheme preceding the verb is a prefix. But that predicts that Types 1 and 2 on Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143B">143B</a> should be more common than Types 3 and 4, but we find Type 4 ([Neg-V-Neg]) as common as Types 1 and 2.</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">One way of thinking about this is the following. The lower frequency of Type 3 ([Neg-V]Neg) relative to Type 4 ([Neg-V-Neg]) amounts to an implicational generalization of the form ‘If a language has double negation and one of the negative morphemes is a prefix on the verb, then the other one will probably be a suffix rather than a separate word’. Significantly, the reverse of this (‘If a language has double negation and one of the negative morphemes is a suffix, then the other one is likely to be a prefix’) is <i>not</i>  true. In other words, negative prefixes predict negative suffixes while negative suffixes do not predict negative prefixes. But this would seem to be simply reflecting the crosslinguistic suffixing preference: the first implicational generalization above correctly predicts suffixes, while the second one, which is not true, predicts prefixes. Put another way, if a language has a negative prefix, then because of the overall suffixing preference, that means it is likely to be a language in which grammatical morphemes are more often affixes rather than separate words, so that if it has a negative prefix, then the postverbal negative morpheme is more likely to be a negative suffix than a negative word.</p>
<h2 class="heading-1"><a name="143C"></a><b>Map 143C: Optional Double Negation</b></h2>
<div style="text-align:left">
<table class="table table-hover values" id="value-table-143C" style="width: auto;">__values_143C__</table>
</div>
<p class="Textbody">Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143C">143C</a> shows languages with optional double negation, languages in which there is sometimes a single negative morpheme and sometimes two negative morphemes. As discussed above (and illustrated by <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_kwo" title="view language details">Kwoma</a> in (26) and <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_pkt" title="view language details">Pokot</a> in (28)), the notion of optional double negation is used broadly here to include any situation in which there is at least one option involving one negative and and at least one other involving two negative morphemes, even if the morphemes involved in the first case are not one of those involved in the second case.</p>
<h3 class="heading-2">
<a name="C1._Defining_the_values"></a>C1. Defining the values</h3>
<p class="Textbody">Types 1 to 17 are types where there are two options, one involving a single negative morpheme, the other involving two negative morphemes, as in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_kwo" title="view language details">Kwoma</a>, illustrated above in (26). Types 18 to 22 involve three options, two involving a single negative morpheme and a third involving two negative morphemes, as in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_nke" title="view language details">Nkem</a>, illustrated above in (30). Type 23 involves four options, one involving a single negative morpheme, two involving two negative morphemes, the third involving three negative morphemes.</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">On the preceding map, Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143B">143B</a>, there were four basic types of obligatory double negation involving negative morphemes on opposite sides of the verb, varying for whether each of the two morphemes was a separate word or an affix. For each of these types, there are two corresponding types involving optional double negation, differing in which negative is optional. For example, given the obligatory double negation type with two negative words, one preceding and one following the verb, there are two corresponding optional double negation types, one where it is the preverbal word that is optional and one where it is the postverbal word that is optional. The first eight types on Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143C">143C</a> are the eight types corresponding to the first four types on Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143B">143B</a>.</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">Types 1 and 2 involve a preverbal and a postverbal negative word, differing as to which is optional. Type 1 represents languages where the obligatory negative word is preverbal. An example of such a language is <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_hau" title="view language details">Hausa</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/afroasiatic#westchadic" title="West Chadic">West Chadic</a>, <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/afroasiatic" title="Afro-Asiatic">Afro-Asiatic</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/NG" title="view languages for country">Nigeria</a>, <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/NE" title="view languages for country">Niger</a>), illustrated in (55), where (55a) illustrates the possibility with two negative words, (55b) the possibility with only a preverbal negative word.</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(55) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_hau" title="view language details">Hausa</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Kraft-and-Kraft-1973" title="view reference details">Kraft and Kraft 1973</a>: 108; <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Kraft-1963" title="view reference details">Kraft 1963</a>: 134)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>bàn</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>san</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>sūna-n-sà</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ba</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b>:1sg</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">know</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">name-<span class="T3">link-3sg</span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I don’t know his name.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ba</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>nà</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>zuwà</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>dà</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>kai</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="continuative, continous">cont</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">come:<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="nominalization">nomin</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">with</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">2sg</span></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I am not going with you.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">Type 2 represents languages with an obligatory postverbal negative word and an optional preverbal negative word, as in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_sup" title="view language details">Supyire</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/nigercongo#gur" title="Gur">Gur</a>, <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nigercongo" title="Niger-Congo">Niger-Congo</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/ML" title="view languages for country">Mali</a>), illustrated in (56).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(56) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_sup" title="view language details">Supyire</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Carlson-1994" title="view reference details">Carlson 1994</a>: 379, 384)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Wùu</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ɲyɛ</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>na</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>jínà</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ɲàà</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>mɛ́</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="plural">1pl</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="progressive">prog</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">jinn</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">see.<span class="T3">imperf</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="6" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘We don’t see a jinn.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Mìì</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>gú</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ɲ̀-jà</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ŋɔ́ɔ́</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>mɛ</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="potential">pot</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="future">fut</span></span>-able</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">sleep</p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="6" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I won’t be able to sleep.’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">Types 3 and 4 involve languages with a preverbal negative word and a negative suffix on the verb. Type 3 represents languages where it is the preverbal negative word that is obligatory, as in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_tmn" title="view language details">Temein</a> (Eastern Sudanic, <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nilosaharan" title="Nilo-Saharan">Nilo-Saharan</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/SD" title="view languages for country">Sudan</a>), illustrated in (57).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(57) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_tmn" title="view language details">Temein</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Tucker-and-Bryan-1966" title="view reference details">Tucker and Bryan 1966</a>: 260)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ja</b></i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ŋ-aus-ɛ<b>-ŋ</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span>-drink-<span class="T3">indic-<b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I don’t drink.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ja</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ņɛ</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ka-mɪl-ɛ-k</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>kaaţaņi</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">people</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">3.pres</span>-dance-<span class="T3">indic-qual</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">today</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘People do not dance today.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">Type 4 represents languages with an obligatory negative suffix and an optional preverbal negative word, as in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_kwo" title="view language details">Kwoma</a>, illustrated above in (26) and in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ina" title="view language details">Inanwatan</a> (<a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/marind" title="Marind">Marind</a>; Papua, <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/ID" title="view languages for country">Indonesia</a>), as in (58).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(58) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ina" title="view language details">Inanwatan</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/de-Vries-2004" title="view reference details">de Vries 2004</a>: 40)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>(Náwo)</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>né-se-s-<b>aigo</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span>-walk-<span class="T3">fut-<b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I am not going to walk.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">Types 5 and 6 involve languages with a negative prefix and a postverbal negative word. Type 5 represents languages where it is the negative prefix that is obligatory, as in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_adz" title="view language details">Adzera</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/austronesian#oceanic" title="Oceanic">Oceanic</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/PG" title="view languages for country">Papua New Guinea</a>), illustrated in (59).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(59) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_adz" title="view language details">Adzera</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Holzknecht-1986" title="view reference details">Holzknecht 1986</a>: 137)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>dzi</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>anuŋʔ</b>-i-saŋʔ</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>rim-a</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>u</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>sib</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>(u)</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b>-real</span>-can</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">help-<span class="T3">ptcpl</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">2sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="completive">compl</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b>(neg)</b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="6" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I am not able to help you.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">Type 6 represents languages with an obligatory postverbal negative word and an optional negative prefix. <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_blx" title="view language details">Biloxi</a>, illustrated in (25) above, is the sole language of this type in the sample. </p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">Types 7 and 8 involve languages with a negative prefix and a negative suffix. Type 7 represents languages where it is the negative prefix that is obligatory, as in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ao" title="view language details">Ao</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/sinotibetan#kukichin" title="Kuki-Chin">Kuki-Chin</a>, Tibeto-Burman; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/IN" title="view languages for country">India</a>), illustrated in (60).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(60) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ao" title="view language details">Ao</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Coupe-2007" title="view reference details">Coupe 2007</a>: 292)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>tʃuniphitʃùnə</i>,</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>hənsəli-la</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>sə</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>nə</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>a-hən</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>təpuŋ-la</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>mə̀</b>-tsəpha<b>-la</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">from.that.day</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">leopard-<span class="T3">fem</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">anaph</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="agent">agt</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">nonrel</span>-fowl</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">cock-<span class="T3">fem</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span>-fear-<span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b>.past</span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="7" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘From that day onwards, [aforementioned] Leopard Cat did not fear Rooster.’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>tə̀-tʃhaɹ</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>a-ja</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>thùŋ-əkə</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>mə̀</b>-tʃhuwa-ə̀ɹ</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">thus-do-<span class="T3">seq</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">nrl</span>-night</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">reach-<span class="T3">simul</span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span>-emerge-<span class="T3">pres</span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="7" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘And then, night comes and [she] doesn’t return.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">Type 8 represents languages with an obligatory negative suffix and an optional negative prefix. <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_tar" title="view language details">Tariana</a>, illustrated in (27) above, is an instance of a language of this sort. </p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">The preceding types are ones in which the two negative morphemes occur on opposite sides of the verb. Types 9 to 12 are ones in which the two negative morphemes occur on the same side of the verb. Type 9, illustrated in (61) from <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_lmg" title="view language details">Lamang</a> (Chadic, <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/afroasiatic" title="Afro-Asiatic">Afro-Asiatic</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/NG" title="view languages for country">Nigeria</a>), involves languages which are V(Neg)Neg, with two postverbal negative words, an optional one immediately following the verb and an obligatory one in clause-final position. Both negative words in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_lmg" title="view language details">Lamang</a> are apparently clitics. Example (61a) illustrates the clause-final negative clitic, following an object. Example (61b) illustrates the optional negative suffix <i>-b</i>  that immediately follows the verb (stem). Its status as a clitic or suffix is somewhat unclear. The fact that it precedes the subject pronominal morphemes which otherwise behave like verbal suffixes might suggest that it is a suffix. However, it can occur on other constituents when those constituents are in focus, as in (61c), suggesting that it is a clitic, the analysis assumed here.</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(61) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_lmg" title="view language details">Lamang</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Wolff-1983" title="view reference details">Wolff 1983</a>: 253, <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Wolff-2009" title="view reference details">Wolff 2009</a>: 39)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>kwsàa-xáŋ</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>t</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ímú<b>=wó</b></i>.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">reach-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="plural">3pl</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="preposition">prep</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">water<b>=<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></span></b></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘They did not reach the water’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>tsxúrá<b>=b</b>-ì</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>wo</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">sit<span class="T3"><b>=neg</b>-1sg</span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I am not sitting.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">c.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ɣén<b>=b</b>-é</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>tsóts-ì</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>wo</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">tongue<span class="T3"><b>=neg</b>-focus</span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">cut.<span class="T3">pluract-1sg</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘It is not the tongue that I keep cutting.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">Type 10 represents a type of optional double negation where both negatives follow the verb stem, with an obligatory negative suffix and an optional negative word following the verb. There are two instances of languages of this type, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_niv" title="view language details">Nivkh</a> (isolate; Sakhalin Island, <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/RU" title="view languages for country">Russia</a>) (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Panfilov-1962" title="view reference details">Panfilov 1962</a>: 156-157) and <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_mab" title="view language details">Maba</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/nilosaharan#maban" title="Maban">Maban</a>, <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nilosaharan" title="Nilo-Saharan">Nilo-Saharan</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/TD" title="view languages for country">Chad</a>). Example (62) illustrates the option with double negation for <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_mab" title="view language details">Maba</a>.</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(62) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_mab" title="view language details">Maba</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Tucker-and-Bryan-1966" title="view reference details">Tucker and Bryan 1966</a>: 204)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>am</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>a-mor<b>-a</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>andi</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span>-tired-<span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I am not tired.’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">Note that the case of Type 10 with double negation corresponds to an unattested type of obligatory double negation, [V-Neg]Neg. In other words, if the postverbal negative word in (62) were obligatory, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_mab" title="view language details">Maba</a> would be an instance of this unattested type.</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">Type 11 represents languages in which there are either one or two negative words preceding the verb. The sole instance of a language of this type is <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_rap" title="view language details">Rapanui</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/austronesian#oceanic" title="Oceanic">Oceanic</a>; Easter Island), illustrated in (63), where (63a) illustrates the single negative, (63b) the double negative.</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(63) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_rap" title="view language details">Rapanui</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Du-Feu-1996" title="view reference details">Du Feu 1996</a>: 90)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>Kai</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>iri</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>au</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b>.past</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">go.up</p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I did not go up.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>’Ina</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>au</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ko</b></i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>iri</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">go.up</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I am not going up.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">Note that the two preverbal negative words in (63b) count separately since there is an intervening subject.</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">Type 12 represents languages with an obligatory preverbal negative word and an optional negative prefix. The sole instance of a language of this type is <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ond" title="view language details">Oneida</a> (<a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/iroquoian" title="Iroquoian">Iroquoian</a>; New York State and southern Ontario), illustrated in (64), where (64a) illustrates the double negation, (64b) single negation.</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(64) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ond" title="view language details">Oneida</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Michelson-and-Doxtator-2002" title="view reference details">Michelson and Doxtator 2002</a>: 113; Karin Michelson, p.c.)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>yáh</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>teʔ</b>-wak-anúhte-ʔ</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b>-1sg.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="patient">pat</span></span>-know-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="stative">stat</span></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I don’t know.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>yáh</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>thaʔ-te-ho-tukóht-u</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">contr-dualic-3masc.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">sg</span>.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="patient">pat</span></span>-succeed-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="stative">stat</span></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘He didn’t pass (e.g. a grade at school).’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">The negative prefix that occurs in (64a) is replaced by a “contrastive” prefix in (64b) in certain aspects and this contrastive prefix is not specific to negative clauses and hence does not count as a negative morpheme.</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">Type 13 represents languages that code negation with a preverbal negative word and in some cases changes to the verb stem. The sole instance of a language of this type is <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_tsk" title="view language details">Tamashek</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/afroasiatic#berber" title="Berber">Berber</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/ML" title="view languages for country">Mali</a>), illustrated in (65). In the future, negation is coded only by a preverbal negative word, as in (65a). In the perfective and imperfective, there is not only the preverbal negative word, but there are also changes to the verb stem, typically changes in the vowel. Example (65b) illustrates this possibility; compare the negative imperfective form of the verb stem of the verb ‘to stand’, <i>bəddəd</i>, in (65b) with the positive imperfective form of the stem of the same verb, which is <i>bɑ́ddæd</i>.</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(65) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_tsk" title="view language details">Tamashek</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Heath-2005" title="view reference details">Heath 2005</a>: 592)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>wær</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>e</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ə̀nhəy-æɤ</i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="future">fut</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">see.<span class="T3">impf-1sg</span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I will not see.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>wər</b></i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ì-b<b>ə</b>dd<b>ə</b>d</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">3sg</span>.masc</span>-stand.<span class="T3"><b>impf.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘He is not standing.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">(The difference between the two negative words in (65) is phonologically conditioned by the next word.)</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">Type 14 represents a more unusual type of optional double negation, consisting of one language, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_pkt" title="view language details">Pokot</a>, illustrated above in (28). In <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_pkt" title="view language details">Pokot</a>, the position of the one negative morpheme when there is just one is not the same as the position of either of the two negative morphemes when there are two of them, in that the negative morpheme when there is just one is a preverbal negative word, whereas the two negative morphemes are a negative prefix and a negative suffix when there are two of them.</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">Type 15 is similar to Type 14, with one construction involving a negative word and the other involving both a prefix and suffix on the verb, except that in Type 15 the negative word follows the verb. The sole language of this type is <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_dun" title="view language details">Duna</a>, illustrated in (29) above.</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">Type 16 is in a sense the opposite of Types 14 and 15: it represents languages where one option is a negative prefix alone, the other option a negative word preceding the verb plus a negative word following the verb. The sole instance of a language of this sort is <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_cop" title="view language details">Sahidic Coptic</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Reintges-2004" title="view reference details">Reintges 2004</a>: 338, 346, 371).</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">Type 17 represents languages which either have a negative word preceding the verb or have negative tone on the verb combined with a postverbal negative word. The sole language of this type is <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ewo" title="view language details">Ewondo</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/nigercongo#bantoid" title="Bantoid">Bantu</a>, <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nigercongo" title="Niger-Congo">Niger-Congo</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/CM" title="view languages for country">Cameroon</a>), illustrated in (66), where (66a) illustrates an affirmative present verb form and (66b) the corresponding negative with different tone on the verb and the postverbal negative word <i>ki</i>. The example in (66c) illustrates the negative past, where an auxiliary verb is used; here the negative word immediately follows the auxiliary and precedes the main verb so this construction is classified as a preverbal negative word.</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(66) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ewo" title="view language details">Ewondo</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Redden-1979" title="view reference details">Redden 1979</a>: 74, 79, 86)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>m-ɑ-dí</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>m-ɑɑ́-<b>dī</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ki</b></i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg-pres</span></span>-eat</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg-pres</span></span>-eat.<span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left; "> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left; padding-bottom:0.6em;">
<p class="Standard">‘I am eating’</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left; "> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left; "> 
		</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left; padding-bottom:0.6em;">
<p class="Standard">‘I am not eating’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">c.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>m-andzí</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ki</b></i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>dí</i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg-past</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">eat</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I didn’t eat’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">The remaining types represent instances of optional double negation where there are more than two options for negative clauses, illustrated by <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_nke" title="view language details">Nkem</a> and <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_mxx" title="view language details">Ayutla Mixe</a> in (30) and (31) above. In Types 18 to 22, there are three options, while in Type 23 there are four options. In Type 18, there is either a preverbal negative word or a negative suffix or both. The examples in (30) above illustrate this type for <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_nke" title="view language details">Nkem</a>, as do the examples in (67) for <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_guh" title="view language details">Guhu-Samane</a> (<a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/transnewguinea" title="Trans-New Guinea">Trans-New Guinea</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/PG" title="view languages for country">Papua New Guinea</a>): (67a) illustrates the preverbal negative word <i>bamu</i>, used in the future; (67b) illustrates a negative suffix, used in the present; and (67c) illustrates both a preverbal negative word <i>te</i>  and a negative suffix used in the past, both different from the negative morphemes in (67a) and (67b).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(67) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_guh" title="view language details">Guhu-Samane</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Richert-1975" title="view reference details">Richert 1975</a>: 787)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Nil</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>bamu</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>moo-ra-qu</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">2sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b>.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="future">fut</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">see-<span class="T3">denot-fut.subjunct</span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘You will not look.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>No</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>tuu-mo-ra<b>-idzara</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">3sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">go-<span class="T3">operat-cont-pres.<b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘He does not go.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">c.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Ana</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>te</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>tuu-ma<b>-ra</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b>.nonfut</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">go-<span class="T3">denot-past.<b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I did not go.’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">In Type 19, there is either a preverbal negative word or a postverbal negative word or both. Two languages, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_tac" title="view language details">Tacana</a> (<a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/tacanan" title="Tacanan">Tacanan</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/BO" title="view languages for country">Bolivia</a>) (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Ottaviano-and-Ottaviano-1967" title="view reference details">Ottaviano and Ottaviano 1967</a>: 144) and <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_rwe" title="view language details">Welsh Romani</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/indoeuropean#indic" title="Indic">Indic</a>, <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/indoeuropean" title="Indo-European">Indo-European</a>; Wales), are languages of this type, the latter illustrated in (68).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(68) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_rwe" title="view language details">Welsh Romani</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Sampson-1926" title="view reference details">Sampson 1926</a>: 220, 221, 221)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>na</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>wånts-ā́</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>mē</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>te</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>bik’n-ā́</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>les</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">want-<span class="T3">pres.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span>.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="nominative">nom</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="subordination">subord</span></span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">sell-<span class="T3">pres.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">3sg</span>.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="accusative">acc</span></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="8" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I do not want to sell him.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>mār-áva</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>tut</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>mē</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>kek</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">kill-<span class="T3">pres.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">2sg</span>.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="accusative">acc</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span>.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="nominative">nom</span></span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="8" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I will not kill you.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">c.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ō</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>kåšt</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>na</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>kūr-’l</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ī</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ǰuklés</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>kek</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="definite">def</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">stick</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">hit-<span class="T3">pres.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">3sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="definite">def</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">dog</p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="8" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘The stick will not beat the dog.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">In Type 20, represented only by <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_dom" title="view language details">Domari</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/indoeuropean#indic" title="Indic">Indic</a>, <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/indoeuropean" title="Indo-European">Indo-European</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/IL" title="view languages for country">Israel</a>, <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/IR" title="view languages for country">Iran</a>, and <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/JO" title="view languages for country">Jordan</a>), there is either a preverbal negative word, as in (69a), a negative suffix, as in (69b), or a negative prefix plus the negative suffix, as in (69c).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(69) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_dom" title="view language details">Domari</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Macalister-1914" title="view reference details">Macalister 1914</a>: 28, 28, 27)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ni</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>lӑher-de</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">see-<span class="T3">past.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="plural">3pl</span></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘They did not see.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>nӑnӑ<b>-meʔ</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">bring-<span class="T3">nonpast.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span>.<b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I do not bring.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">c.</p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>in</b>-nӑnӑ<b>-meʔ</b></i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span>-bring-<span class="T3">nonpast.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span>.<b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I do not bring’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">Type 21 represents languages where there is a negative prefix, a postverbal negative word, or both a prefix and a suffix. The sole instance of a language of this type is <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_tgl" title="view language details">Tshangla</a> (Tibeto-Burman; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/BT" title="view languages for country">Bhutan</a> and <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/IN" title="view languages for country">India</a>), illustrated in (70), where (70a) illustrates the negative prefix used alone, (70b) and (70c) illustrate the postverbal word, and (70d) illustrates the negative prefix used in combination with a negative suffix.</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(70) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_tgl" title="view language details">Tshangla</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Andvik-1999" title="view reference details">Andvik 1999</a>: 340, 339, 347, 348)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Ji-gi</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>nan-kap</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>kholong</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ma</b>-phi-la</i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg-actor</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">2sg</span></span>-with</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">fight</p>
</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span>-do-<span class="T3">ptcpl</span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="8" style="text-align:left; padding-bottom:0.6em;">
<p class="Standard">‘I am not going to fight with you.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Rap-thur</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>na-shi</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Kencho-ga</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>nyingche</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>khepa</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>se-wa</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>man-chhi</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>...</i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">time-one</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="plural">2pl-actor</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">God-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="locative">loc</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">mercy</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">topic</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">know-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="nominalization">nomin</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b>neg-copula.past</b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="8" style="text-align:left; padding-bottom:0.6em;">
<p class="Standard">‘At one time, you had not been knowing the mercy of god, ...’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">c.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Ji-gi</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>man-rang</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>za-wa</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>man-cha</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg-actor</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">medicine-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="emphatic">emph</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">eat-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="nominalization">nomin</span></span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b>neg-copula.nonpast</b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="8" style="text-align:left; padding-bottom:0.6em;">
<p class="Standard">‘I haven’t been taking my medicines at all.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">d.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Ro</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ser</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="6" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ma</b>-nyong-<b>chhi</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">3sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">gold</p>
</td>
<td colspan="6" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span>-receive-<span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b>.past</span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="8" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘He didn’t get the gold.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">These three options in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_tgl" title="view language details">Tshangla</a> arise in the following way. All three options involve a negative prefix <i>ma- ~ man-</i>, which occurs on the main verb if there is no auxiliary, as in (70a) and (70d) or on the auxiliary if there is one, as in (70b) and (70c). When it occurs on the main verb, the verb must bear a suffix, but sometimes this suffix is not specific to negative constructions, as in (70a) and sometimes it is specific to negative constructions, as in (70d) (in which case we have double negation). When the negative prefix occurs on the auxiliary verb, as in (70b) and (70c), this auxiliary counts as a negative word by the criteria assumed here. Now the morpheme I am treating as a negative suffix in (70d) is actually the same morpheme as the root of the auxiliary verb in (70b). This morpheme is more generally a past tense copula verb. As a copula or auxiliary verb, it is not specifically negative. However, it apparently occurs as a suffix only in negative constructions, so I am treating it in those cases as a negative morpheme, though one could just as easily treat it as a morpheme not specific to negative constructions, in which case, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_tgl" title="view language details">Tshangla</a> would have only double negation.</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">Type 22 is represented only by <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_mxx" title="view language details">Ayutla Mixe</a>, illustrated above in (31). In this language, there is a preverbal negative word or a negative prefix or both.</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">The last type, Type 23, involves four options where there is optional double negation plus optional triple negation. The one language of this type, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_kwt" title="view language details">Kwomtari</a>, is illustrated above in (33). This type is also shown on Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143D">143D</a>.</p>
<h3 class="heading-2">
<a name="C2._Theoretical_discussion"></a>C2. Theoretical discussion</h3>
<p class="Textbody">The most frequent type on this map is Type 2, with an obligatory postverbal negative word and an optional preverbal negative word. This type is almost twice as frequent as the next more frequent type, Type 1, with an obligatory preverbal negative word and an optional postverbal negative word. It is somewhat surprising that Type 2 is the more frequent type, since among languages with a single negative word, languages with preverbal negative words (524 languages) are over three times as common as languages with postverbal negative words (171 languages). However, when we look at the distribution of the two types on the map, we see that many of the Type 2 languages are concentrated in a few areas. In fact, 13 of the 20 Type 2 languages are spoken in Africa. And three of the others are <a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/hokan#yuman" title="Yuman">Yuman</a> languages in northwestern <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/MX" title="view languages for country">Mexico</a> and adjacent <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/US" title="view languages for country">United States</a>. While 3 of the Type 1 languages are <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/torricelli" title="Torricelli">Torricelli</a>
 languages of <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/PG" title="view languages for country">Papua New Guinea</a>, the Type 1 languages overall have a broader geographical distribution.</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">There is also a curious difference between the frequency of the different types with optional double negation and the corresponding types with obligatory double negation. If we pool Types 1 and 2 on Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143C">143C</a> (NegV(Neg) and (Neg)VNeg), and likewise for the next three pairs of types, we can compare the frequencies of languages requiring obligatory double negation with those allowing optional double negation, given in the following table:</p>
<p class="caption-table"><b>Table 1. </b>Frequencies of languages requiring obligatory double negation with those allowing optional double negation</p>
<div style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 1.5em;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<th>
<p class="Standard"> </p>
</th>
<th style="text-align: center;">
<p class="Standard">Obligatory</p>
</th>
<th style="text-align: center;">
<p class="Standard">Optional</p>
</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p class="Standard">NegVNeg</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align: right; padding-right: 2em;">
<p class="Standard">36</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align: right; padding-right: 2em;">
<p class="Standard">21</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p class="Standard">Neg[V-Neg]</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align: right; padding-right: 2em;">
<p class="Standard">28</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align: right; padding-right: 2em;">
<p class="Standard">10</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p class="Standard">[Neg-V]Neg</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align: right; padding-right: 2em;">
<p class="Standard">9</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align: right; padding-right: 2em;">
<p class="Standard">5</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p class="Standard">[Neg-V-Neg]</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align: right; padding-right: 2em;">
<p class="Standard">27</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align: right; padding-right: 2em;">
<p class="Standard">11</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="Textbody">The primary difference between the types with obligatory and optional double negation is that among languages with optional negation, the first type, NegVNeg, is twice as common (21 languages) as the next most frequent type (11 languages), but not significantly greater among languages with obligatory double negation (36 languages versus 28). The only possible explanation I am aware of is that reflects the same areal phenomenon mentioned in the preceding paragraph, an accident of the high number of (Neg)VNeg languages in Africa.</p>
<h2 class="heading-1"><a name="143D"></a><b>Map 143D: Optional Triple Negation</b></h2>
<div style="text-align:left">
<table class="table table-hover values" id="value-table-143D" style="width: auto;">__values_143D__</table>
</div>
<p class="Textbody">The sample contains six languages with optional triple negation, each of a unique type. Types 1 to 5 have obligatory double negation with optional triple negation. Type 6 has optional double negation with optional triple negation.</p>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionD1.1."></a>Type 1: (Neg)[Neg-V-Neg]</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 1, represented by <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_gnb" title="view language details">Gunbalang</a>, is illustrated above in (32); it involves an obligatory negative prefix and negative suffix on the verb plus an optional negative word preceding the verb. </p>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionD1.2."></a>Type 2: [V-Neg]Neg with optional negative infix or prefix</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 2, represented by <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_tbl" title="view language details">Tabla</a> (<a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/sentani" title="Sentani">Sentani</a>; Papua, <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/ID" title="view languages for country">Indonesia</a>), involves an obligatory negative suffix on the verb and obligatory negative word following the verb plus an optional negative infix or prefix, as illustrated in (71). The example in (71a) illustrates the possibility without the optional negative infix. The examples in (71b) and (71c) illustrate the possibility with the negative infix; when the verb stem begins with a vowel, as in (71c), the infix appears as a prefix. </p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(71) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_tbl" title="view language details">Tabla</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Collier-and-Gregerson-1985" title="view reference details">Collier and Gregerson 1985</a>: 171)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>buru<b>-i</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>pai</b></i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">mix-<span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘not mix’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>d<b>&lt;i&gt;</b>es-<b>i</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>pai</b></i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">fell<b>&lt;<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></span>&gt;-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></span></b></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘not fell (trees)’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">c.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>y</b>-aru<b>-i</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>pai</b></i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span>-put.in-<span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘not put in’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">Forms with the infix are apparently somewhat irregular. With some verbs whose stems begin with consonants, the first vowel is replaced by /i/, with others the /i/ occurs as a prefix, and with others there is no possibilility of an infix or prefix. Note that the case without the optional infix or prefix is [V-Neg]Neg, an unattested type of double negation without triple negation.</p>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionD1.3."></a>Type 3: NegVNeg / NegNegVNeg</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 3, represented by <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_non" title="view language details">Noni</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/nigercongo#bantoid" title="Bantoid">Bantu</a>, <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nigercongo" title="Niger-Congo">Niger-Congo</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/CM" title="view languages for country">Cameroon</a>), is illustrated in (72). There are two options with two negatives, either a clause-initial negative word plus a clause-final particle, as in (72a), or a negative word immediately preceding the verb plus the clause-final particle, as in (72b). The second option, with three negatives, illustrated in (72c), involves one negative in clause-initial position, a second one in immediately preverbal position (in the sense that neither the subject nor the object intervene between the negative and the verb), and a third one in clause-final position.</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(72) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_non" title="view language details">Noni</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Hyman-1981b" title="view reference details">Hyman 1981b</a>: 70, 59)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>kɛ́</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>bɔ́</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>nǔ</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>géé</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>kfun</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>kɛ</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="plural">3pl</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="future">fut</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">fut₁</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">hit</p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="7" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘They will not hit (later today).’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>bɔ́</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>bé</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>bǎ</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>yém</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>kfun</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>bɔɔm</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>kɛ</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="plural">3pl</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">past₁</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">sing</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">hit</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">children</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="7" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘They didn’t sing and hit the children.’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">c.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>kɛ́</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>bɔ́</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>yà</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>nǔ</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>géé</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>kfun</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>kɛ</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="plural">3pl</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="future">fut</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3">fut₁</span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">hit</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="7" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘They will not hit (later today)’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionD1.4."></a>Type 4: (i) Neg[V-Neg] or (ii) NegVNeg with negative tone</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 4, represented by <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_doy" title="view language details">Doyayo</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/nigercongo#adamawa" title="Adamawa">Adamawa</a>, <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nigercongo" title="Niger-Congo">Niger-Congo</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/CM" title="view languages for country">Cameroon</a>), is illustrated in (73). In the first option, illustrated in (73a) (repeated from (41) above), there is negative tone on the subject pronoun <i>hi¹</i>, a negative auxiliary verb <i>taa¹²</i>  preceding the verb, plus negative tone on the incompletive suffix <i>ko³</i>, which counts here as a negative suffix. As explained in the discussion of this example above under (41), the first two of these count as a single negation rather than as double negation since they occur adjacent to each other without the possibility of intervening material. In the second option, illustrated in (73b), there is first negative tone on the subject pronoun, which counts here as a negative word preceding the verb; second, negative tone on the verb; and third, a clause-final negative word <i>gɛɛ²³</i>.</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(73) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_doy" title="view language details">Doyayo</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Wiering-and-Wiering-1994" title="view reference details">Wiering and Wiering 1994</a>: 81, 80)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>hi¹</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>taa¹²</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>zaa¹<b>-ko³</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="plural">3pl</span>.<b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">be.<span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">come-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="incompletive">incompl</span>.<b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘They will not come.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>mi¹</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>gbɛ²ni</b>-g¹</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>gɛɛ²³</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span>.<b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">see.<span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b>-3sg.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="object">obj</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I didn’t see him.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">If we had chosen to define double negation differently such that adjacent negative words were counted separately, then <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_doy" title="view language details">Doyayo</a> would have counted as a language with obligatory triple negation since (73a) involves two preverbal negative words as well as negative tone on the suffix on the verb and (73b) already counts as triple negation by the criteria assumed here. However, none of the languages in the sample have obligatory triple negation by the criteria assumed here.</p>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionD1.5."></a>Type 5: Neg[V(-Neg)]Neg / [Neg-V(-Neg)]Neg</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 5 represents languages with an obligatory preverbal negative word or prefix, an obligatory postverbal negative word, and an optional negative suffix. The sample contains only one language of this type, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_kon" title="view language details">Kongo</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/nigercongo#bantoid" title="Bantoid">Bantu</a>, <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nigercongo" title="Niger-Congo">Niger-Congo</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/CD" title="view languages for country">Democratic Republic of Congo</a>), illustrated in (74). Example (74a) illustrates the possibility of a preverbal negative word <i>ka</i>, a negative suffix <i>-a:</i>  on the verb, and a clause-final negative word <i>kó</i>. The preverbal negative word in some instances optionally fuses with the subject prefix, as in (74b), so that in these instances we have a negative prefix, a negative suffix, and a clause-final negative word. The negative suffix is not used, however, in relative completive aspect, as in (74c).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(74) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_kon" title="view language details">Kongo</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Lumwamu-1973" title="view reference details">Lumwamu 1973</a>: 214, 200, 215)</p>
<div style="text-align: left;">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ka</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>n-í-di<b>-á</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>nsusu</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>kó</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg-incompl</span></span>-eat-<span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">chicken</p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I will not eat chicken.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>k</b>-ú-kwi:zá-:</i></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ko</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b>-2sg</span>-come-<span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘You are not coming.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">c.</p>
</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ka</b>-t-a-dí-di-éti</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>ko</b></i>.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b>-1pl-compl</span>-eat-<span class="T3">past-rel.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="completive">compl</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><b><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="negation, negative">neg</span></b></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
		</td>
<td colspan="5" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘We have not yet eaten.’</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody"><a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_kon" title="view language details">Kongo</a> is perhaps the closest case to a language with obligatory triple negation (assuming the criteria used here) since the possibility of double negation is restricted to only one of a number of aspects.</p>
<h4 class="heading-3">
<a name="sectionD1.6."></a>Type 6: Neg[V-(Neg)](Neg)</h4>
<p class="Textbody">Type 6 involves the only type with optional double negation and optional triple negation. That is, it is like the preceding Types 1 to 5 in having optional triple negation, but differs from them in that double negation is also optional for Type 6 languages. It represents languages with an obligatory preverbal word and two optional morphemes, a negative suffix and a postverbal negative word, where it is possible to have neither of the optional morphemes, just one or the other of them, or both. The sole instance of a language of this type, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_kwt" title="view language details">Kwomtari</a>, is illustrated above in (33).</p>
<h2 class="heading-1"><a name="143E"></a><b>Map 143E: Preverbal Negative Morphemes</b></h2>
<p class="Textbody">Maps 143E to 143G show the same languages that have been shown on the preceding four maps, but the data is rearranged. Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143E">143E</a> shows languages that allow preverbal negative morphemes, either separate words or prefixes, and includes types shown on each of the preceding four maps. It includes languages where the sole possibility involves a preverbal negative, languages that allow an alternation at least one of the possibilities of which involves a preverbal negative, and languages with double negation in which one of the negatives is a preverbal negative.</p>
<div style="text-align:left">
<table class="table table-hover values" id="value-table-143E" style="width: auto;">__values_143E__</table>
</div>
<p class="Textbody">Type 1 represents languages in which at least one possibility involves a preverbal negative word, but does not include languages that also have negative prefixes. This includes languages where this is the sole possibility (Type 1 on Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143A">143A</a>), languages where there are two possibilities, at least one of which involves a preverbal negative word (Types 6 to 8 on Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143A">143A</a>), languages with obligatory double negation where at least one possibility involves a preverbal negative word (Types 1, 2, 7, 8, and 10 to 14 on Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143B">143B</a>), languages with optional double negation where at least one possibility involves a preverbal negative word but where a negative prefix is not possible (Types 1 to 4, 9 to 11, 13, and 17 to 19 on Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143C">143C</a>), languages with optional single negation where the optional negative morpheme is a preverbal negative word (Type 13 on Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143A">143A</a>), and languages with triple negation where at least one possibility involves a preverbal negative word (Types 3, 4 and 6 on Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143D">143D</a>). Type 2 represents languages in which at least one possibility involves a negative prefix but where a preverbal negative word is not possible. Type 3 represents languages in which both a preverbal negative word and a negative prefix exist as possibilities. This includes languages with single negation where there is an alternation between preverbal negative words and negative prefix (Type 7 on Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143A">143A</a>, Types 14, 16, 20, and 22 on Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143C">143C</a>) and languages where preverbal negative words and negative prefixes can co-occur (Type 8 on Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143B">143B</a>, Types 12 and 21 on Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143C">143C</a>, and Type 1 and 5 on Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143D">143D</a>) . Type 4 represents languages where there is no possibility of expressing negation with a preverbal negative morpheme, where only postverbal negative morphemes or tone are used.</p>
<h2 class="heading-1"><a name="143F"></a><b>Map 143F: Postverbal Negative Morphemes</b></h2>
<div style="text-align:left">
<table class="table table-hover values" id="value-table-143F" style="width: auto;">__values_143F__</table>
</div>
<p class="Textbody">The four types on Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143F">143F</a> are analogous to those on Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143E">143E</a>, except that they involve postverbal negative morphemes.</p>
<h2 class="heading-1"><a name="143G"></a><b>Map 143G: Minor morphological means of signaling negation</b></h2>
<div style="text-align:left">
<table class="table table-hover values" id="value-table-143G" style="width: auto;">__values_143G__</table>
</div>
<p class="Textbody">Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/143G">143G</a> shows three types of minor morphological means of coding negation. Type 1 includes all languages that employ tone on the verb as at least part of the way to code negation. Type 2 does the same for infixes and Type 3 the same for changes to the verb stem. Type 4 represents languages which do not represent negation by any of these three morphological means. </p>
</div></body></html>