<html><body><div dir="ltr" id="description">
<p class="Textbody firstParaNoHeading">In some languages gender is evident in almost every phrase, while in other languages it is absent. This contrast raises interesting questions as to its function. Equally, in some languages it is relatively easy to determine the type of gender system and to establish how many genders the language has, while in others it takes careful analysis. </p>
<h2 class="heading-1">
<a name="1._Defining_the_values"></a>1. Defining the values</h2>
<p class="Textbody">The defining characteristic of gender is <b>agreement:</b> a language has a gender system only if we find different agreements ultimately dependent on nouns of different types. In other words, there must be evidence for gender outside the nouns themselves. These <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_rus" title="view language details">Russian</a> sentences illustrate the point:</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(1) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_rus" title="view language details">Russian</a></p>
<div style="text-align:left">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Žurnal</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ležal</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>na</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>stole.</i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
        </td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">magazine</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">lay.<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="masculine">m</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">on</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">table</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
        </td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘The magazine lay on the table.’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Kniga</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ležal-a</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>na</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>stole.</i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
        </td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">book</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">lay-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="feminine">f</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">on</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">table</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
        </td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘The book lay on the table.’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">c.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Pis´mo</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ležal-o</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>na</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>stole.</i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
        </td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">letter</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">lay-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="neuter">n</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">on</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">table</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
        </td>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘The letter lay on the table.’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">We find <i>ležal</i>  ‘lay’ in (1a) as opposed <i>to ležal-a</i>  or <i>ležal-o</i>  because of the gender of the noun <i>žurnal</i>  ‘magazine’. The difference in the form of the verb in our three examples results just from the type of noun; there are no other differences in number, case or syntactic structure. We are therefore dealing with a gender system. If in (1a), instead of the noun <i>žurnal</i>  ‘magazine’ we had the noun <i>mal´čik </i>  ‘boy’, <i> djadja</i>  ‘uncle’ or some other noun denoting a male, the same form of the verb would be used. Hence nouns like <i>žurnal</i>  ‘magazine’, as indeed nouns like <i>mal´čik</i>  ‘boy’ and <i>djadja</i>  ‘uncle’, are said to belong to the masculine gender. Nouns like <i>sestra</i>  ‘sister’ would take the agreement as in (1b), and so nouns like <i>kniga</i>  ‘book’ and <i>sestra</i>  ‘sister’ are said to belong to the feminine gender. That leaves nouns like <i>pis´mo</i>  ‘letter’ as the members of the neuter gender. </p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">To avoid confusion note that the mere existence of nouns like <i>djadja</i>  ‘uncle’ and <i>sestra</i>  ‘sister’, denoting males and females, is not enough to constitute a gender system. There must be syntactic evidence, in agreement. <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_knr" title="view language details">Kanuri</a> (<a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nilosaharan" title="Nilo-Saharan">Nilo-Saharan</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/NG" title="view languages for country">Nigeria</a>) does not have a gender system, but does have lexical contrasts such as <i>tádà</i>  ‘boy, son’ versus <i>férò</i>  ‘girl, daughter’ (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Hutchison-1981" title="view reference details">Hutchison 1981</a>: 11, 38, 45). This is a matter of lexical semantics, and not a gender system. Such lexical oppositions may be instantiated through derivational morphology (<a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_eng" title="view language details">English</a> shows examples like <i>poet</i>  and <i>poetess</i>). Again this of itself does not give a gender system. The reason is that there can be numerous similar oppositions, concrete versus abstract for example, none of which would be counted as grounds for postulating a grammatical category in the language in question. Similarly, inflectional markers on the nouns themselves are insufficient to ground a gender system: in our <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_rus" title="view language details">Russian</a> examples, the inflection <i>–a</i>  might seem to indicate feminine gender, but in fact <i>djadja</i>  ‘uncle’ and <i>papa</i>  ‘daddy’ are masculine, which we prove by the agreements they take, irrespective of their form. We shall limit ourselves to true gender systems which can be demonstrated on the basis of agreement evidence.</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">Our examples have involved agreement of the verb, but there are various other targets which may agree in gender, such as adjectives, determiners, numerals and even focus particles. Most scholars working on agreement include the control of anaphoric pronouns by their antecedent (<i>the girl</i> ... <i>she</i> ) as part of agreement. If this is accepted, as we do here, then languages in which free pronouns present the only evidence for gender will be counted as having a gender system. Of course, such languages with <b>pronominal gender systems</b> have a much less pervasive system than those like <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_rus" title="view language details">Russian</a>. Including them, however, makes little difference to the overall picture, since they are rare (the best known example is <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_eng" title="view language details">English</a>, which is typologically unusual in this respect); another is <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_def" title="view language details">Defaka</a> (<a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nigercongo" title="Niger-Congo">Niger-Congo</a>; Niger Delta, <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/NG" title="view languages for country">Nigeria</a>; <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Jenewari-1983" title="view reference details">Jenewari 1983</a>: 103-106).</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">Since agreement is the defining characteristic, gender can be distinguished from other classification systems, such as <b>classifiers</b>. Classifiers are of various types, a common one being numeral classifiers analogous to <i>head</i>  in the <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_eng" title="view language details">English</a> expression <i>eighty head of cattle</i>. Distinguishing gender from classifiers is justified in <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Dixon-1982" title="view reference details">Dixon (1982)</a> and <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Corbett-1991" title="view reference details">Corbett (1991</a>: 136-137), and examples can be found in <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Aikhenvald-2000" title="view reference details">Aikhenvald (2000)</a>. It is possible, if unusual, for a language to have both gender and classifiers. One such a language is <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_tar" title="view language details">Tariana</a> (North <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/arawakan" title="Arawakan">Arawakan</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/BR" title="view languages for country">Brazil</a>; <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Aikhenvald-1994" title="view reference details">Aikhenvald 1994)</a>, which has a gender system and three sub-types of classifier. Coexistence of gender and classifiers is found in other languages of our sample: in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ret" title="view language details">Retuarã</a> (<a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/tucanoan" title="Tucanoan">Tucanoan</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/CO" title="view languages for country">Colombia</a>; <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Strom-1992" title="view reference details">Strom 1992</a>: 10-11, 34-36, 45-47) and in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_tid" title="view language details">Tidore</a> (<a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/westpapuan" title="West Papuan">West Papuan</a>; Halmahera, <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/ID" title="view languages for country">Indonesia</a>; <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/van-Staden-2000" title="view reference details">van Staden 2000</a>: 77-81). <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ngg" title="view language details">Ngan’gityemerri</a> (Daly; northern <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/AU" title="view languages for country">Australia</a>) shows the development from generic classifiers into genders (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Reid-1997" title="view reference details">Reid 1997</a>). A further consequence of the definition is that differences in use of language which depend on the sex of the speaker (lexical choice, voice quality and so on) are not treated here; an example is the difference between men’s and women’s pronunciation in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_chk" title="view language details">Chukchi</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Dunn-2000" title="view reference details">Dunn 2000</a>).</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">We should note that often there is no substantive difference between what are called “genders” and what are called “noun classes”; the different terms may be merely the products of different linguistic traditions. Thus we find systems with three genders, to which nouns are assigned by similar rules, in both <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_knd" title="view language details">Kannada</a> (<a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/dravidian" title="Dravidian">Dravidian</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/IN" title="view languages for country">India</a>) and <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_god" title="view language details">Godoberi</a> (<a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nakhdaghestanian" title="Nakh-Daghestanian">Nakh-Daghestanian</a>; eastern Caucasus). By tradition the first is said to have three genders, and the second three noun classes. We shall treat both as having gender. </p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">We have established our criteria for deciding whether a language has a gender system. It is equally important to be clear on definitions when we ask how many genders particular languages have. Our approach starts from <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Zaliznjak-1964" title="view reference details">Zaliznjak (1964)</a>. Basically, two nouns are in the same gender provided that, however we change the environment (treating both the same), then both will take the same agreements. Again traditions vary. The earlier Bantuist tradition treated nouns as being in different noun classes when singular and plural; we consider the total behaviour of a noun, including both its singular and its plural, with the result that a typical Bantu language may have 7-10 genders rather than around 20 noun classes. More generally, while in many languages there is no dispute as to the number of genders, there are a few where the question is far from straightforward. The analytical problem of determining the number of genders and the tests for deciding the gender of a given noun depend on separating out the classes into which nouns are divided (the controller genders) from the number of different genders marked on agreement targets (the target genders). Frequently the two match up, but in several languages they do not. A full treatment of the subject with extensive references can be found in <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Corbett-1991" title="view reference details">Corbett (1991)</a>. Based on the analysis there, the analytical decisions made for this chapter are that the number of genders given on the map is the core system, the number of controller genders. (Hence neutral genders, locative genders, subgenders, overdifferentiated targets, inquorate genders, hybrid nouns and those with double or multiple gender are all left out of account here; the interesting detail can be found in <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Corbett-1991" title="view reference details">Corbett 1991</a>: 145-188.)</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">The values for the number of genders are as follows: </p>
<div style="text-align:left">
<table class="table table-hover values" id="value-table-30A" style="width: auto;"><caption><a name="30A"></a><b>Values of Map 30A.</b> Number of Genders</caption>__values_30A__</table>
</div>
<p class="Textbody">As the figures show, the map is based on 256 languages, of which somewhat over half (144) have no gender system. A minimal gender system requires two genders, and such systems are common, with 50 examples in this sample. Three genders is around half as common (26 examples) and four genders, about half as common again (12). Larger systems, with five or more genders, are treated together, and represent a substantial minority (24 languages in the sample). </p>
<h2 class="heading-1">
<a name="2._Geographical_distribution"></a>2. Geographical distribution</h2>
<p class="Textbody">We look first at the distribution of gender languages versus non-gender languages. The two largest families differ in this regard. <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nigercongo" title="Niger-Congo">Niger-Congo</a> has almost 1500 languages, a large proportion of which have gender systems (of interesting types, as we shall see in Chapter <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/chapter/31">31</a>). This family is found in western, central and southern Africa. The sample has 23 <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nigercongo" title="Niger-Congo">Niger-Congo</a> languages, including <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_cic" title="view language details">Chichewa</a>, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_kis" title="view language details">Kisi</a> and <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_swa" title="view language details">Swahili</a>. Just three have lost gender, following radical simplification of the morphological system; these are <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ewe" title="view language details">Ewe</a>, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_igb" title="view language details">Igbo</a> and <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_yor" title="view language details">Yoruba</a>. The other very large family is <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/austronesian" title="Austronesian">Austronesian</a>, with some 1250 languages spread across the Pacific, including <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_rap" title="view language details">Rapanui</a> (the language of Easter Island), <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ind" title="view language details">Indonesian</a> and <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_mao" title="view language details">Maori</a>. 21 Austronesian languages figure in the sample, none with a gender system, apart from the curious exception of <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_tag" title="view language details">Tagalog</a>, which has partially borrowed the <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_spa" title="view language details">Spanish</a> system (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Schachter-and-Otanes-1972" title="view reference details">Schachter and Otanes 1972</a>: 197-198). Elsewhere in Austronesian, gender has arisen in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_teo" title="view language details">Teop</a> (North-West Solomonic, <a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/austronesian#oceanic" title="Oceanic">Oceanic</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/PG" title="view languages for country">Papua New Guinea</a>; not in our sample) by three spatial demonstratives forming a system of gender-distinguishing articles (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Mosel-and-Spriggs-2000" title="view reference details">Mosel and Spriggs 2000</a>).</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">While <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nigercongo" title="Niger-Congo">Niger-Congo</a> is the major source, other families of Africa are gender “hotbeds” in Nichols’ terms (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Nichols-1992" title="view reference details">1992</a>: 130-132). <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/khoisan" title="Khoisan">Khoisan</a> languages in the south (represented by <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_juh" title="view language details">Ju|'hoan</a> in our sample) have interesting gender systems (see <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Guldemann-2000" title="view reference details">Güldemann 2000</a>), and <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/afroasiatic" title="Afro-Asiatic">Afro-Asiatic</a> in the north contributes many gender languages (including <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_amh" title="view language details">Amharic</a>, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ams" title="view language details">Modern Standard Arabic</a>, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_hau" title="view language details">Hausa</a>, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_heb" title="view language details">Hebrew</a> and <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_qaf" title="view language details">Qafar</a>). <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nilosaharan" title="Nilo-Saharan">Nilo-Saharan</a> is mixed, but none of the five languages in the sample shows gender. To the north, Europe is a predominantly gender area, with <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/indoeuropean" title="Indo-European">Indo-European</a> languages such as <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_fre" title="view language details">French</a>, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ger" title="view language details">German</a> and <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_rus" title="view language details">Russian</a>. In the Caucasus, the <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nakhdaghestanian" title="Nakh-Daghestanian">Nakh-Daghestanian</a> family is a stronghold of gender. <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/indoeuropean" title="Indo-European">Indo-European</a> extends to the South Asian sub-continent, with gender languages such as <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_hin" title="view language details">Hindi</a> and <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_mhi" title="view language details">Marathi</a>. In southern <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/IN" title="view languages for country">India</a>, <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/dravidian" title="Dravidian">Dravidian</a> languages typically show gender (examples in our sample are <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_knd" title="view language details">Kannada</a>, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_tml" title="view language details">Tamil</a> and <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_kol" title="view language details">Kolami</a>). Elsewhere gender is less strong. <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/austroasiatic" title="Austro-Asiatic">Austro-Asiatic</a> presents a mixed picture, with gender in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_khs" title="view language details">Khasi</a> and <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_nic" title="view language details">Nicobarese</a>, but not in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_khm" title="view language details">Khmer</a> or <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_vie" title="view language details">Vietnamese</a>. In New Guinea, several families show gender, and of widely differing types. In Australia there are several gender languages, such as <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_mau" title="view language details">Maung</a> and <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_bbw" title="view language details">Bininj Gun-Wok</a>, mainly clustered in the north. In the Americas, gender languages form a minority. In North America, there are <a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/algic#algonquian" title="Algonquian">Algonquian</a> languages like <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_cre" title="view language details">Plains Cree</a> and <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_oji" title="view language details">Ojibwa</a> (discussed in Chapter <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/chapter/31">31</a>). There are a few gender languages in Central America, such as <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_mxc" title="view language details">Chalcatongo Mixtec</a> and <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_cle" title="view language details">Lealao Chinantec</a> (both <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/otomanguean" title="Oto-Manguean">Oto-Manguean</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/MX" title="view languages for country">Mexico</a>). In South America the picture is mixed, with several of the families of Amazonia including gender languages. From the opposite perspective, the main areas <i>without</i> gender are the Pacific, most of Asia (notably the <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/sinotibetan" title="Sino-Tibetan">Sino-Tibetan</a> family), including Siberia (notably the families grouped under <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/uralic" title="Uralic">Uralic</a> and <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/altaic" title="Altaic">Altaic</a>), together with several families of North America, especially those to the west.</p>
<p class="Textbody">Our discussion has been in terms of languages; if we think of numbers of speakers, then the major gender family would be <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/indoeuropean" title="Indo-European">Indo-European</a>, which includes <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_eng" title="view language details">English</a>, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_fre" title="view language details">French</a>, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ger" title="view language details">German</a>, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_hin" title="view language details">Hindi</a>, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_por" title="view language details">Portuguese</a>, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_rus" title="view language details">Russian</a>, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_spa" title="view language details">Spanish</a>, each with many millions of speakers. On the other, non-gender side would be <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/sinotibetan" title="Sino-Tibetan">Sino-Tibetan</a>, in which <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_mnd" title="view language details">Mandarin</a> and <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_cnt" title="view language details">Cantonese</a> alone account for a substantial proportion of the world’s population. Again, then, there is a substantial split . Many speak gender languages and many do not. </p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">Given a gender system, the most common number of genders is two. Such languages are found in most gender areas. <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/afroasiatic" title="Afro-Asiatic">Afro-Asiatic</a> systems regularly have two genders, though there are complex interactions with number (see <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Corbett-and-Hayward-1987" title="view reference details">Corbett and Hayward 1987</a>). In <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/indoeuropean" title="Indo-European">Indo-European</a> many languages retain three genders (like <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ice" title="view language details">Icelandic</a> and <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ger" title="view language details">German</a>), while many others have reduced to two (like <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_fre" title="view language details">French</a> and <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_spa" title="view language details">Spanish</a>); a minority have lost gender altogether (e.g. <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_arm" title="view language details">Armenian</a>). Four-gender systems are particularly prevalent in <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nakhdaghestanian" title="Nakh-Daghestanian">Nakh-Daghestanian</a> languages (our sample includes <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_arc" title="view language details">Archi</a>, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_lak" title="view language details">Lak</a> and <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_tsz" title="view language details">Tsez</a>), though they occur elsewhere too, as in the isolate <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_bur" title="view language details">Burushaski</a>. For larger systems the major source is <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nigercongo" title="Niger-Congo">Niger-Congo</a>, where systems in excess of five genders are common. <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_fni" title="view language details">Nigerian Fula</a> is exceptional, having around twenty genders, depending on the dialect (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Arnott-1967" title="view reference details">Arnott 1967</a>; 1970: 67-75; <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Koval-1979" title="view reference details">Koval´ 1979</a>; <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Breedveld-1995" title="view reference details">Breedveld 1995</a>: 295-460). Other large systems can be found in Papua New Guinea, where <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_arp" title="view language details">Mountain Arapesh</a> has 13 genders (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Fortune-1942" title="view reference details">Fortune 1942</a>; <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Aronoff-1994" title="view reference details">Aronoff 1994</a>: 89-114; <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Fraser-and-Corbett-1997" title="view reference details">Fraser and Corbett 1997</a>). In northern Australia too, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ngg" title="view language details">Ngan’gityemerri</a> arguably has 15 genders (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Reid-1997" title="view reference details">Reid 1997</a>). </p>
<h2 class="heading-1">
<a name="3._Theoretical_issues"></a>3. Theoretical issues</h2>
<p class="Textbody">One substantial issue, noted earlier, is the function of gender systems, given that they pervade some languages, are of some importance in others, and are missing in yet others. This and related issues are discussed in <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Corbett-1991" title="view reference details">Corbett (1991)</a>. Besides that source, the questions of the way in which gender systems develop, and the way in which they are represented, are also treated briefly in Chapters <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/chapter/31">31</a> and <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/chapter/32">32</a>.</p>
<h2 class="heading-1">
<a name="4._Acknowledgement"></a>4. Acknowledgement</h2>
<p class="Textbody">This research was funded in part by the ESRC (UK) under grants R000238228 and R000271235. This support is gratefully acknowledged.</p>
</div></body></html>