<html><body><div dir="ltr" id="description">
<p class="Textbody firstParaNoHeading">Since its beginning in the 19th century, morphological typology has postulated a universal scale of less vs. more tightly packed word forms. The scale ranges from <b>isolating</b> to <b>agglutinative</b> to <b>fusional</b> to <b>introflexive</b>, and is canonically exemplified by <a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/sinotibetan#chinese" title="Chinese">Chinese</a> (isolating), <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_tur" title="view language details">Turkish</a> (agglutinative), Latin (fusional) and <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ams" title="view language details">Modern Standard Arabic</a> (introflexive). Recent research has shown that such a scale conflates many different typological variables and incorrectly assumes that these parameters covary universally (see <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Plank-1999" title="view reference details">Plank 1999</a>, <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Bickel-and-Nichols-2005" title="view reference details">Bickel and Nichols 2005</a>, among others). Three prominent variables involved in this are phonological <b>fusion</b>, formative <b>exponence</b>, and <b>flexivity</b> (i.e. allomorphy, inflectional classes). In this chapter we concentrate on fusion. For exponence, see Chapter <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/chapter/21">21</a>, and for one aspect of flexivity, see Chapter <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/chapter/59">59</a> (on possessive classification).</p>
<h2 class="heading-1">
<a name="1._Defining_fusion_types"></a>1. Defining fusion types</h2>
<p class="Textbody">Fusion refers to the degree to which grammatical markers (called <i>formatives</i> in the following) are phonologically connected to a host word or stem. There are three basic values: isolating, concatenative, and nonlinear.</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent"><b>Isolating</b> formatives are full-fledged phonological words of their own. In <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_fij" title="view language details">Fijian</a>, all formatives with more than one mora are isolating. An example is the past tense formative <i>aa</i>:</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(1) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_fij" title="view language details">Boumaa Fijian</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Dixon-1988" title="view reference details">Dixon 1988</a>: 53)</p>
<div style="text-align:left">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Au </i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i><b>aa</b></i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>soli-a </i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>a=niu </i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>vei </i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ira. </i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">1<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="past">pst</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">give-<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="transitive">tr</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="article">art</span></span>=coconut</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">to </p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">3<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="plural">pl</span></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="6" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I gave the coconut to them.’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody"><b>Concatenative</b> formatives are phonologically bound. They need some other host word for their pronunciation and form one single phonological word together with that host. The usual effects of this are that concatenative formatives cannot be individually stressed, and that the combination of formative and host undergoes various phonological adjustments. The past tense marker of <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_tur" title="view language details">Turkish</a>, for example, undergoes vowel harmony and assimilates in consonant voicing to the host stem. Thus, the past tense formative is <i>-ti</i> after a stem with unrounded front vowels and a voiceless final consonant (e.g. <i>git-ti</i> ‘go-past’), <i>-tı</i> after a stem with unrounded back vowels and a voiceless final consonant (e.g. <i>yap-tı</i> ‘do-past’), <i>-di</i> after a stem with unrounded front vowels and a voiced final consonant (e.g. <i>gel-di</i> ‘come-past’), and so on. A subset of concatenative markers is constituted by cliticized words. The <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_spa" title="view language details">Spanish</a> object marker <i>a</i>, for example, is syntactically a word (preposition) but phonologically it is a clitic and thus concatenative.</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">Once the phonological alternations are properly analyzed, strings of concatenative formatives can be segmented into clear-cut morphemes. <b>Nonlinear</b> formatives are not amenable to this because they are realized not in linear sequence but by direct modification of their host. In our sample, we found two subtypes of nonlinear formatives: <b>ablaut</b> and <b>tonal</b>. <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_heb" title="view language details">Modern Hebrew</a> illustrates the ablaut type. The past (“perfect”) vs. future (“imperfect”) opposition, for example, is expressed by (i) the choice of a stem template (e.g. <i>CaCVC</i> in the past, <i>CCVC</i> in the future) and (ii) the choice of agreement affixes (entirely suffixes in the past, mostly prefixes in the future).</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(2) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_heb" title="view language details">Modern Hebrew</a> (Orin Gensler, p.c.)</p>
<div style="text-align:left">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a. </p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>šamar-ti </i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b. </p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ʔe-šmor </i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
        </td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">guard.<span class="T3">pst-1sg.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="past">pst</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
        </td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">1sg</span>.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="future">fut</span></span>-guard.<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="future">fut</span></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
        </td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I guarded’ </p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
        </td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘I will guard’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">Neither affix nor stem choice appears to be basic. Tense is not marked in this language by an extractable morpheme but by the complete affix-plus-stem pattern as a whole. For purposes of this survey we call this <i>ablaut morphology.</i> </p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">Suprasegmental nonlinear formatives chiefly involve tonal modification. In <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_kis" title="view language details">Kisi</a> (Atlantic; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/GN" title="view languages for country">Guinea</a>), most tense-aspect opposition are expressed by tone, and tone alone: </p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(3) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_kis" title="view language details">Kisi</a> (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Childs-1995" title="view reference details">Childs 1995</a>: 220-3)</p>
<div style="text-align:left">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a. </p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Ò </i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>cìmbù. </i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
        </td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">3<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">leave.<span class="T3">pres.habitual</span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
        </td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘She (usually) leaves.’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b. </p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>Ò </i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>cìmbú. </i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
        </td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">3<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="singular">sg</span></span></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">leave.<span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="past">pst</span>.<span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="perfective">pfv</span></span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
        </td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘She left.’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">Here, present habitual is expressed by low tone on the last syllable (3a); past perfective is expressed by high tone (3b).</p>
<h2 class="heading-1">
<a name="2._Sampling_procedure_and_feature_values"></a>2. Sampling procedure and feature values</h2>
<p class="Textbody">Languages were surveyed for the case and tense-aspect-mood exemplars as defined in the chapter on <a href="http://wals.info/supplement/5">“Sampling case and tense formatives”</a>. Nearly 90% of the languages in our sample have the same values for case and tense-aspect-mood, and therefore we combined the two values into one overall value: </p>
<div style="text-align:left">
<table class="table table-hover values" id="value-table-20A" style="width: auto;"><caption><a name="20A"></a><b>Values of Map 20A.</b> Fusion of Selected Inflectional Formatives</caption>__values_20A__</table>
</div>
<p class="Textbody">Mixed types mean that case and tense-aspect-mood differ from each other, and the type list exhausts what combinations are attested in our sample. In a few instances, however, mixed types refer to languages where there is conflicting evidence for the fusion type of at least one of the formatives. Conflicting evidence is found, for example, in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_lkt" title="view language details">Lakhota</a> (<a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/siouan" title="Siouan">Siouan</a>; North and South Dakota), where the future tense marker <i>-kta</i> is part of the same phonological word as the verb stem with regard to morphophonological rules, but not apparently with regard to syllabification (see  for careful discussion). Other instances of conflicting evidence that we found include <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_bej" title="view language details">Beja</a>, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_tha" title="view language details">Thai</a>, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_cha" title="view language details">Chamorro</a>, and <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_goo" title="view language details">Gooniyandi</a>. </p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">The color scheme on the map is set up so as to highlight the presence of some isolating and the presence of some nonlinear formatives. </p>
<h2 class="heading-1">
<a name="3._Results_and_discussion"></a>3. Results and discussion</h2>
<p class="Textbody">Most of the languages in our sample (75%) rely exclusively on concatenative morphology for case and tense-aspect-mood. Languages with some isolating or nonlinear formatives are much rarer and have limited areal distribution. </p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">Languages with isolating formatives, or traces of isolating structure in mixed types, are mostly confined to the Sahel Belt of West Africa and to Southeast Asia and the Pacific. Apart from this, there are outliers in southern Africa (<a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_kho" title="view language details">Khoekhoe</a>), <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/AU" title="view languages for country">Australia</a> (<a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_goo" title="view language details">Gooniyandi</a>), and the Americas (several instances).</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">In our sample, ablaut morphology is always mixed with concatenative morphology and appears as an African singularity limited to representatives of <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/afroasiatic" title="Afro-Asiatic">Afro-Asiatic</a> (<a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_heb" title="view language details">Hebrew</a>, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_aeg" title="view language details">Egyptian Arabic</a>, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_bma" title="view language details">Middle Berber Atlas</a>, <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_bej" title="view language details">Beja</a>) and the Central Sudanic branch of <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nilosaharan" title="Nilo-Saharan">Nilo-Saharan</a> (<a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_lug" title="view language details">Lugbara</a>). Similarly, tonal morphology is also by and large restricted in our sample to African languages (<a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nigercongo" title="Niger-Congo">Niger-Congo</a> and <a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/nilosaharan#nilotic" title="Nilotic">Nilotic</a>). An outlier with tonal formatives is <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_iau" title="view language details">Iau</a> (<a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/lakesplain" title="Lakes Plain">Lakes Plain</a>; Papua, <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/ID" title="view languages for country">Indonesia</a>). </p>
<h2 class="heading-1">
<a name="4._Acknowledgements"></a>4. Acknowledgements</h2>
<p class="Textbody">This research was supported by U.S. National Science Foundation Grant No. 96-16448 (Nichols, P.I.), Swiss National Science Foundation Grants No. 08210-053455 and 610-062717 (Bickel, P.I.), and the Institute for Slavic, Eurasian, and East European Studies, UC Berkeley. We thank Aimee Lahaussois Bartosik, Dave Peterson, and Suzanne Wilhite for help with data collection.</p>
</div></body></html>