<html><body><div dir="ltr" id="description">
<p class="Textbody firstParaNoHeading">Linguistic gender systems are frequently linked to biological sex. This is not the only possibility; alternatives occur, particularly in some of the larger gender systems. </p>
<h2 class="heading-1">
<a name="1._Defining_the_values"></a>1. Defining the values</h2>
<p class="Textbody">We saw in Chapter <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/chapter/30">30</a> how, in many languages, nouns may be divided into groups according to the agreements they take, even when we control for other factors such as number and case. We should then ask whether these groups are arbitrary. The answer is that there is always a semantic “core” to the system. That is, there is an overlap between the nouns which take a particular set of agreements and some semantic feature. (This overlap may be greater or smaller, as we shall see in Chapter <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/chapter/32">32</a>.) In the familiar systems such as <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_fre" title="view language details">French</a> and <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ger" title="view language details">German</a>, and indeed in the majority, the link is to biological sex. This was illustrated from <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_rus" title="view language details">Russian</a>, in Chapter <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/chapter/30">30</a>, and can be seen again in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_bbw" title="view language details">Bininj Gun-Wok</a> (<a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/australian#gunwinygic" title="Gunwinygic">Gunwinygic</a>; northern <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/AU" title="view languages for country">Australia</a>; <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Evans-et-al-2002" title="view reference details">Evans et al. 2002</a>: table 1). Here we see agreement of the adjective in gender in the Kunwinjku dialect of the language (older speakers):</p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(1) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_bbw" title="view language details">Bininj Gun-Wok</a> </p>
<div style="text-align:left">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>bininj</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>na-mak</i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
        </td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">man </p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">I-good </p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
        </td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘good man’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>daluk</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ngal-mak</i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
        </td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">woman </p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">II-good </p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
        </td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘good woman’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">c.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>kamarn</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>man-mak</i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
        </td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">cheeky.yam </p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">III-good </p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
        </td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘good cheeky yam’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">d.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>kukku</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>kun-mak</i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
        </td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">water </p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">IV-good </p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
        </td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘good water’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">Nouns denoting males, like <i>bininj</i>  ‘man’, are found in gender ‘I’, and take the ‘I’ agreement marker <i>na-</i>. Male sex forms the semantic core of this gender, but there are other nouns found in it too; for example, it is the default gender for non-human animates. Nouns denoting females, like <i>daluk</i>  ‘woman’, are found in gender ‘II’, and take the ‘II’ agreement marker <i>ngal-</i>. Again, though female sex forms the semantic core of this gender, there are other nouns in it too, mainly denoting lower animates.</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">Such systems present considerable variety, as we shall see. However, not all gender systems are sex-based. Consider these examples from <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_fum" title="view language details"> Maasina Fulfulde</a> (Atlantic; <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Breedveld-1995" title="view reference details">Breedveld 1995</a>: 295): </p>
<blockquote class="example"><p class="example-start">(2) <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_fum" title="view language details"> Maasina Fulfulde</a> </p>
<div style="text-align:left">
<table class="table table-hover">
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">a.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>nɛɗɗɔ</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ˀɔ</i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
        </td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">person</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="definite">def</span>.’o</span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
        </td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘the person’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">b.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ɲiiwa</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ba</i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
        </td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">elephant</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="definite">def</span>.ba</span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
        </td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘the elephant’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">c.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>laana</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ka</i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
        </td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">boat</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="definite">def</span>.ka</span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
        </td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘the boat’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">d.</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>lekki</i></p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><i>ki</i></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
        </td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">tree</p>
</td>
<td style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard"><span class="T3"><span class="hint--bottom" data-hint="definite">def</span>.ki</span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align:left;"> 
        </td>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:left;">
<p class="Standard">‘the tree’ </p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>
<p class="example-end"></p></blockquote>
<p class="Textbody">Fulfulde/Fula has around twenty genders (dialects vary: <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_fgu" title="view language details">Guinean Fula</a>, the dialect recorded on the map, is particulary rich); the singular forms of some genders are illustrated here. They are usually labelled by capitals, according to the form of the article they take (e.g. <span class="T3">'o</span> or <span class="T3">ba</span>); adjectives, demonstratives, numerals and pronouns also show similar agreement. We can see that the form of the article changes to mark agreement with the noun, as in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_fre" title="view language details">French</a> or <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_ger" title="view language details">German</a>. The noun has a class suffix, which may be similar in form to the article, or it may be in conflict with it (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Breedveld-1995" title="view reference details">Breedveld 1995</a>: 296), in which case, of course, it is the agreement which tells us the gender. The gender <span class="T3">'o</span>/<span class="T3">'ba</span> (that is, nouns taking <span class="T3">'o</span> in the singular and <span class="T3">'ba</span> in the plural) includes <i>dɛbbɔ</i>  ‘woman’, and indeed a whole range of nouns denoting humans. Thus it has a clear semantic core; however, sex is not a part of it: nouns denoting human males and human females are found in the same gender. Other genders overlap with semantic categories to a greater or lesser degree; thus together with ‘elephant’ we find other large animals, wild and domesticated, and the word for ‘field’. Sex plays a minor role in the Fulfulde <span class="T3">ndi</span> gender, where according to <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Breedveld-1995" title="view reference details">Breedveld (1995</a>: 329-330) there are nouns denoting signs of wealth, seeds, slave names and domestic male animals; note, however, that not all domestic male animals are in this gender (for example, ‘male donkey’ belongs with ‘elephant’ (1995: 411)).</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">There are various types of gender systems where biological sex is not the semantic core. These are all based on some notion of animacy. When required there is no problem about expressing distinctions based on sex in such languages, by the use of separate lexical items (whether based on different roots or derivationally linked) or by qualifying items with the meaning ‘male/female’. The use of the term <i>gender</i> is still fully appropriate for systems based on animacy, because structurally the systems are fully comparable. Note too that <i>gender</i> derives etymologically from Latin <i>genus</i>, via Old French <i>gendre</i>, and originally meant ‘kind’ or ‘sort’.</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">The values for the map, which is based on the same sample of 256 languages as Map <a class="Feature" href="http://wals.info/feature/30A">30A</a>, are as follows:</p>
<div style="text-align:left">
<table class="table table-hover values" id="value-table-31A" style="width: auto;"><caption><a name="31A"></a><b>Values of Map 31A.</b> Sex-based and Non-sex-based Gender Systems</caption>__values_31A__</table>
</div>
<h2 class="heading-1">
<a name="2._Variety_in_sex-based_systems"></a>2. Variety in sex-based systems</h2>
<p class="Textbody">Though a major division is between sex-based and non-sexed-based systems, we should not neglect the variety within these groupings.  </p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">First there is variety in how closely the grammatical gender system relates to the corresponding semantic category. At one end of the scale, in sex-based systems the genders may match the semantic category almost completely. Examples can be found in <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/dravidian" title="Dravidian">Dravidian</a> languages, where for instance in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_tml" title="view language details">Tamil</a>, it is almost correct to say that nouns denoting male humans are masculine, and masculine nouns denote male humans. There is more to be said, since this gender also includes male deities, but the statement captures the essence of the system. Compare this with the very different system of a typical <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/indoeuropean" title="Indo-European">Indo-European</a> language like <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_fre" title="view language details">French</a> or <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_rus" title="view language details">Russian</a>, where it is also correct to say that nouns denoting males are typically masculine, but where the masculine nouns include a large proportion of nouns which do not denote males. We may also find exceptions where nouns denoting humans of one sex are found in the ‘wrong’ gender. Typically, however, these nouns are not fully in that gender but take agreements of more than one type and are "hybrid nouns" (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Corbett-1991" title="view reference details">Corbett 1991</a>: 176-181).</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">Second, these languages may set the threshold for "sex differentiability" at different points. Sex distinctions extend to insects and plants, but no language has been reported as including reference to their biological sex within a grammatical system. Humans are most interested in the sex of other humans, and the threshold may well be set here. This is the case for <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_tml" title="view language details">Tamil</a>, where both ‘bull’ and ‘cow’ are in the neuter gender. Similarly in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_tid" title="view language details">Tidore</a> (<a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/westpapuan" title="West Papuan">West Papuan</a>; North Moluccas, <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/ID" title="view languages for country">Indonesia</a>), a rooster is treated as grammatically neuter, as is a pregnant goat (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/van-Staden-2000" title="view reference details">van Staden 2000</a>: 77-78 and personal communication). Other languages set the threshold lower. In <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_rus" title="view language details">Russian</a>, sex-differentiability extends to creatures whose sex matters to humans (that is, primarily animals which humans breed), or where the difference is striking (as with lions); nouns which fall below the threshold may be in any gender (thus ‘shark’ is feminine and ‘dolphin’ is masculine).  </p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">There are some curious effects of status, usually within the feminine gender. <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_lak" title="view language details">Lak</a> (Daghestanian; central Daghestan highlands) has four genders, in broad outline: male rationals (I), female rationals (II), other animates (III), though this has other members too, including many inanimates, and a residue gender (IV), which also includes a few animates. There was an important exception, namely <i>duš</i>  ‘girl, daughter’, a member of gender III instead of the expected gender II. Gender III agreements became a sign of politeness when addressing young women (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Xajdakov-1963" title="view reference details">Xajdakov 1963</a>: 49-50), particularly those earning their own living, and nouns denoting them have been transferred to gender III. This usage has extended so that now gender III agreement forms are appropriate for any woman outside the immediate family. Within the family, older women such as <i>ninu</i>  ‘mother’ and <i>amu</i>  ‘grandmother’ are addressed and referred to using gender II forms. Thus gender II is semantically restricted and is left with extremely few nouns in it. Something comparable has happened in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_kkn" title="view language details">Konkani</a> (<a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/indoeuropean" title="Indo-European">Indo-European</a>; west coast of <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/IN" title="view languages for country">India</a>; <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Miranda-1975" title="view reference details">Miranda 1975</a>: 208-13), where the word for ‘girl’ was neuter. Where human referents are concerned, the neuter has become the gender for young females (or those relatively younger from the speaker’s standpoint), while the feminine is for old, or relatively older, females. A similar change in the core meaning of genders has occurred in some southern <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_pol" title="view language details">Polish</a> dialects (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Zareba-1984" title="view reference details">Zaręba 1984-85</a>). In several of these dialects, nouns denoting girls and unmarried women (irrespective of age), and including hypocoristics, are of neuter gender. Neuter agreements are employed when unmarried women are addressed, and they use them for self-reference. In a smaller area, to the south-west of Kraków, instead of the neuter the masculine is used. In both types of dialect, the feminine is used for married women. The change from neuter or masculine to feminine for a particular woman occurs immediately after the church wedding ceremony; the communities involved are small, and so there is no difficulty about knowing who is married and who is not (A. Zaręba, p.c.). The meaning of the feminine has changed in both dialect types, being restricted now to denote married women. (Feminine nouns which are not semantically motivated also remain feminine.) For further details on all these, and suggestions as to how they have arisen, see <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Corbett-1991" title="view reference details">Corbett (1991</a>: 24-26, 99-101).</p>
<h2 class="heading-1">
<a name="3._Variety_in_non-sex-based_systems"></a>3. Variety in non-sex-based systems</h2>
<p class="Textbody">These systems are all based on some type of animacy. The first source of variation is the threshold for differentiability. One possible distinction is human versus non-human, as we saw in Fulfulde. This is found more widely in <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nigercongo" title="Niger-Congo">Niger-Congo</a>; a clear account of these systems can be found in <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Welmers-1973" title="view reference details">Welmers (1973</a>: 159-183). Several Bantu languages have lowered the threshold, so that animals go together with humans to give an animate gender (this change in languages of the coastal area of Kenya and northern Tanzania is documented in <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Wald-1975" title="view reference details">Wald 1975</a>). The other main area for non-sex-based gender systems is the <a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/algic#algonquian" title="Algonquian">Algonquian</a> family of <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/CA" title="view languages for country">Canada</a> and the northern <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/US" title="view languages for country">United States</a>. These two-gender systems distinguish animate and inanimate. As with sex-based systems, a source of variation is the type of “leaks” that occur into semantically motivated genders. In <a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/algic#algonquian" title="Algonquian">Algonquian</a> there are various examples of apparent non-animates which are treated as animates. For example, in <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_oji" title="view language details">Eastern Ojibwa</a>, nouns denoting persons, animals, spirits and trees are animate: <i>enini</i>  ‘man’, <i>enim</i>  ‘dog’, <i>menito:</i>  ‘manitou’, <i>mettikumi:šš</i>  ‘oak’ (<a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Bloomfield-1957" title="view reference details">Bloomfield 1957</a>: 31-32). Others are inanimate. But several nouns are unexpectedly animate, including: <i>enank</i>  ‘star’, <i>meskomin</i>  ‘raspberry’, <i>ekkikk</i>  ‘kettle’. Various approaches to this unexpected deviancy in animacy could be taken. One might simply treat them as lexical exceptions; they are few in number, and such small groups of exceptions are often found in gender systems. Others have suggested that animacy is only a part of the explanation, and that the system must be seen in terms of a different world view, in which "power" is the dominant element, and where nouns treated as animate have at some point been viewed as denoting powerful entitities. A proponent of this view is <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Black-Rogers-1982" title="view reference details">Black-Rogers (1982)</a>; see <a class="Reference" href="http://wals.info/refdb/record/Corbett-1991" title="view reference details">Corbett (1991</a>: 20-24) for further data and sources.</p>
<p class="Firstlineindent">A second source of variation is the nature of the semantic basis for the other genders. In larger systems, as in <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nigercongo" title="Niger-Congo">Niger-Congo</a>, the non-human or non-animate genders (of which there may be several) may in turn be semantically justified to a greater or lesser extent. This is an ongoing debate, in that some see the apparently mixed collection of nouns in certain genders as reflecting some conceptual cohesion, while others treat them as relics of earlier systems, now linked by formal rather than semantic similarity. </p>
<h2 class="heading-1">
<a name="4._Geographical_distribution"></a>4. Geographical distribution</h2>
<p class="Textbody">The picture is relatively clear. Sex-based systems are found in almost all areas where there is gender. Of the 112 languages with gender in the sample, three quarters (84) have sex-based systems. The main non-sex-based area is covered by the extensive <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nigercongo" title="Niger-Congo">Niger-Congo</a> family in western, central and southern Africa, which contributes 17 of the 28 non-sex-based systems. Most of these have five or more genders, but <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_grb" title="view language details">Grebo</a> and <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_kfe" title="view language details">Koromfe</a> have three. The other substantial non-sex-based area is that of the <a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/algic#algonquian" title="Algonquian">Algonquian</a> family of North America, reflected in our sample by <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_cre" title="view language details">Plains Cree</a>, Ojibwa and <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_psm" title="view language details">Passamaquoddy-Maliseet</a>. Elsewhere there is <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_juh" title="view language details">Ju|'hoan</a>, representing <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/khoisan" title="Khoisan">Khoisan</a> languages from southern Africa. In <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/austroasiatic" title="Austro-Asiatic">Austro-Asiatic</a>, the languages in our sample are <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_mun" title="view language details">Mundari</a> and <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_nic" title="view language details">Nicobarese</a>. In Australia there is <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_wrd" title="view language details">Wardaman</a>. Two <a class="Genus" href="http://wals.info/family/cariban#cariban" title="Cariban">Carib</a> languages (<a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_hix" title="view language details">Hixkaryana</a> and <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_mac" title="view language details">Macushi</a>) are both of this type, as is <a class="Language" href="http://wals.info/languoid/lect/wals_code_cle" title="view language details">Lealao Chinantec</a> (<a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/otomanguean" title="Oto-Manguean">Oto-Manguean</a>; <a class="Country" href="http://wals.info/country/MX" title="view languages for country">Mexico</a>). The wide scatter of these languages shows that animacy is a viable basis for gender systems. Nevertheless, it is overshadowed by sex-based-systems.</p>
<h2 class="heading-1">
<a name="5._Theoretical_implications"></a>5. Theoretical implications</h2>
<p class="Textbody">The existence of systems which are structurally similar, but which have different semantic content, offers exciting perspectives for psycholinguistic research. The longevity of the non-sex-based systems within <a class="Family" href="http://wals.info/languoid/family/nigercongo" title="Niger-Congo">Niger-Congo</a> has implications for historical linguistics, since it shows that a minority system can maintain itself and develop in a variety of ways without adopting the majority scheme. Finally, for those interested in language and gender in the sociological sense, these direct reflections of biological sex in many languages, with the "control group" of languages with similar gender structures but without the sex component, should provide a valuable source of data. </p>
</div></body></html>